[, SABOTAGE  HANDBOOK.  Volume 1 Miscellaneous Industries Volume 2 . Oil. Volume 3 Electric Power. Volume 4 Shipping. Volume 5 Railway. Volume 6 Telecommunications. Volume V Military Targets. Volume 8 Home-made Devices. n, INTRODUCTION.  1. OBJECT. The Sabotage Handbook is prepared with the object of providing an outline of the processes and plant employed in the various industries which constitute economic objectives together with an indication of the vital parts of the-installations The Handbook is intended as a guide to those responsible for planning operations and to provide basic material for the purposes of training. It is not intended for the direct use of students.  2. METHODS. ' ' Whilst the effects of a Go Slow policy in industry can be extremely important and should be practised wherever possible results are bound to be limited by the operation of the piecework method of payment now of almost universal application. Ca canny methods have been used from time immemorial in trade disputes and it would be useless to attempt to detail them in this Handbook as each'worker. and official will know the best way to apply them ho his particular job. Organisers would however do well to cultivate non-collaborating managements as where both management and workers are in collusion results will be many times greater. The drafting of workers to Germany offers a good approach to managements who may be prepared to remove skilled men to semi-skilled woi k in order to retain their services. Nevertheless the results obtainable by ca canny methods are. limited so that it is necessary to undertake more direct forms of attack. -   The methods embraced in this manual comprise recommended forms of active sabotage including action with high explosive charges up to a scale which would be suitable for special raiding parties.  In some cases an indication is given of the amount of explosive required this is intended only as a rough guide to the scale of operations and in view of the. wide fluctuations in design and local conditions it will always be necessary to consider each case on its merits.  No information has been given regarding the. use of explosives or the calculation of charges. Rough calculations can be made by reference to the appropriate service manuals and it is assumed that expert advice will be taken in the case of specific operations.  Although instructions are given in this manual for dealing with industrial targets by various other individual methods the damaging effects of fire and water separately or in conjunction cannot be, INTRODUCTION. 2. over-emphasised. A small fire can cause damage out of all proportion to its size due to the generous use of water in extinguishing the fire. It may also happen that the firing of a combustible building will result in a quantity of valuable machinery or stock being exposed to the weather as well as to fire hoses resulting in delay damage and disorganisation. The reason for the outbreak of the majority of fires in normal times is never discovered. Incendiarism is thus a doubly attractive method for the saboteur 3. GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF ATTACK. In planning attacks upon industrial plant the following general principles should always be followed in order that the maximum value may be obtained for the effort put into that operation   a Attack oast iron in preferenoe to steel -It is easier to damage and more difficult to repair.  b Attack maohinery in motion rather than at rest preferably at a bearing or main casting the machine will then assist in its own destruction.  c Attack non-standard machines -they are less likely to be readily replaceable.  d Attack large complicated pieces if possible in inaccessible situations replacement and restoration is more difficult.  e In large-scale operations against similar targets attack identical parts in each unit -this prevents the enemy from making one good machine out of several damaged ones.  f Always consider the possibility of achieving the object by means of fire water or smashing -explosives and manufactured stores are thereby rendered unnecessary and greater security is obtained  g Always look for the bottleneck machines production can often be stopped entirely if two or three vital machines are rendered useless. Notwithstanding the above the incidence of war-time conditions has had the effect of creating severe shortages of the most common types of machinery The destruction or damaging of such items as motors gear-boxes pumps etc. on auxiliary services is, INTRODUCTION  3  therefore likely to yield useful dividends under  these circumstances and should not be overlooked.  4. SELECTION OP OBJECTIVES. Although anything which can be done to hamper the enemy war effort is of value very much greater damage can be done if the energies of the operators are directed against certain selected industries which by reason of shortage of capacity or raw material are more vulnerable to attack. Even so discrimination must be used as for instance although the destruction of petrol and oil and the sources of their production is of the highest priority the immobilisation of refining plant in Europe would be almost useless in most cases as the available capacity is greatly in excess of the volume of oil which requires treatment. On the other hand denial of the production of a specific plant or group of plants as in Roumania can be justified on the grounds that its loss would force the enemy to transport the crude product to an alternative installation and then perhaps to bring back the finished material.  5. INTERDEPENDENCE OF INDUSTRY. The interdependence of industries is of great importance as these links often provide an alternative target in the event of the primary target being invulnerable. It will usually be found that the output of a machine can be held up by attacking the sources of some important component as the greater part of industry has now become highly specialised and it is most unusual for a complete machine to be manufactured and assembled in the same works. For example the output of aircraft can be restricted by operating against specialist firms manufacturing components such as engines airscrews undercarriage legs fuel tanks etc. The makers of the components are in turn dependent upon supplies of steel or light alloy bars sheet strip castings forgings etc. On the other hand an undertaking such as a mine may often be most profitably attacked through its transport system as it may be dependent upon a long aerial ropeway a railway or a canal.  6. ELECTRIC POWER. A target of almost universal application throughout industry is electric power. Without electric power modern industry would be at a standstill and it has the advantage of providing a concentrated target. An attack against two or three machines in an engineering works would have little significance unless they were vital to the process but an attack on the transformers or even the power cables will usually shut down the whole works until supplies can be restored., INTRODUCTION.  4. The loss of output from a great number of machines even for a few hours would'have substantial value and in the case of many industries electric power will be found to be the only target whereby sensible loss of production can be caused by a comparatively simple operation. If the attack is directed against the national system it may be possible to shut down a large industrial area a result which cannot be produced by any other  method with such economy of force.  However many continental works still maintain their own generating equipment as a standby so that subject to coal being available they could carry on at least on a reduced output until repairs could be effected. In such cases steps will have to be taken to neutralise the standby plant in addition.  Hydraulic power is frequently an essential feature of heavy engineering works which may be relatively easily disrupted.  7. TRANSPORT. The interdependence of industry to which reference has already been made creates an enormous transport problem Hot only have the raw materials to be brought together at the place of manufacture and the finished products to be delivered but there is a vast movement between factories of partly finished goods and finished components. In order to maintain the flow of production these must arrive on time so that any delay which can be produced in the transport system will have an effect in numerous industrial undertakings.  Apart from direct attacks transportation can be hampered indirectly in several ways including the following   a Increasing the load to be carried e g. by immobilising the concentrating plant at an important mine thus making it necessary to transport raw ore in lieu of concentrate  b Increasing the length of the haul e.g by immobilising an alumina plant situated close to a bauxite mine.  c Causing additional material to be carried -e.g. by immobilising sources of hydro-electric power or isolating them from the areas of consumption thus making it necessary to transport coal to standby thermal generating stations., INTROIXJOTl'OU.i.  5. Attacks against industrial targets may therefore be contrived to be indirect attacks against transportation sometimes but direct attacks against transport will always to some extent indirectly interfere with industry. Transportation of all kinds is thus a target of high priority especially railways canals shipping and high tension trunk transmission systems carrying hydroelectric power.  Nevertheless most of the Western European transport systems particularly railways have enormous resources which provide a considerable cushioning effect. Coup de main parties are therefore likely to be more effective against railways in highly developed countries when.directed against . enemy military plans than against his war effort generally.  ECONOMIC PRIORITIES  Appendix AT to this introduction comprises the Ministry of Economic Warfare list of the principal economic objectives in Axis Europe Such a list is necessarily subject to changes in the supply position caused by conquest development of new sources alterations in demand and other reasons A revised list must therefore be obtained at frequent intervals to cover such changes.  The objectives have been classified into five groups the items in each group being in priority order. It is however impossible to make any cross comparison of priorities as between groups as without the element of quantity one cannot compare for example the importance of wrecking locomotives with the denial to the enemy of pyrites. It is clear however that locomotives are a better target than wagons as the immobilisation of one locomotive will probably render 60 to 80 wagons useless for a similar period and steel alloy materials which are relatively rare and found in small quantities are on a higher priority than bauxite which is used in much greater quantity and is not in such short supply  lb may be objected that the list does not include such important war industries as iron and steel cement chemical works or oil seed crushing plants. Whilst there may be oases where such plants can be dealt with on the principle of interdependence as a means of attacking transport or due to favourable local conditions yet they can all be attacked more effectively through other industries which are on the list and which are more susceptible due to shortage. Iron and steel depends upon coal coke ovens and iron ore cement upon coal chemical works upon minerals including pyrites and electric power whils-t oil seed crushing mills are sufficiently.numexous to justlfj' th-a. transfer of attention, INTRODUCTION  6. to stocks of processed oil except perhaps in areas   f production. All 4 an be attacked through transport. Each industrial section of the Handbook contains information provided by M.E.W on the respective economic situations from which selection of the best targets may be made. This information Is also liable to changes due to fluctuating conditions.  9. OPERATIONAL PLANNING.  i The complete and permanent immobilisation qf an industrial undertaking will seldom if ever be achieved whether by air or ground attack owing to the great resources for improvisation and reinstatement which will generally be available to the enemy. It must therefore be realised that as opportunities for carrying out major eoups will be limited our principal aim should be the a hievement by numerous acts of sabotage against lesser targets of a cumulative effect . which will handicap and reduce the enemy s war effort. The knowledge that by his efforts alone several thousand or even several hundred machine hours have been lost to the enemy should give the agent..oonfldanoa and encouragement to try again.  A further reason for encouraging the less ambitious projects is that special stores may be unnecessary which not only saves a complicated dropping operation but avoids the possibility of the agent s being found in possession of materials the purpose of which cannot be open to doubt. Security is thus greatly increased.  A study of the papers which follow will show that certain industries are vulnerable to action by coup de main whilst others are not. The latter should always be given to organisers for action locally if possible by fire water or sledge hammer methods . special parties being reserved for dealing with targets containing vital pieces of equipment suitable for attack with -explosive. Examples of targets most suitable for local action through organisers are leather wool and wooiled skins textiles grinding wheels optical glass  instruments etc.  When planning an operation serious consideration should be given to the provision of sufficient information about the target to enable agents to be trained in the recognition of their objective as the average person has very little idea as to the identity of machinery  r  10. ARRANGEMENT OF THE HANDBOOK In view of the great importance of certain subjects It has been necessary to allot them complete volumes. Separate book-g. have hhoa-afor baan prepared, INTRODUCTION.  7. to cover Railways Shipping Oil Electric Power and Horae-made Devices In order to avoid repetition the remaining economic objectives have not been dealt with seriatim but a series of papers has been prepared with a view to covering the ground with a minimum of duplication. In these papers an endeavour is made in each section to indicate the application of the processes described to the various target materials. A section is also included on Damage by Fire and Water.  A volume has also been prepared to cover Telegraphic Telephonic and Radio Communications as this subject will be of great importance in the event of an invasion of the continent whilst a further volume includes miscellaneous papers dealing with purely military targets such as Aircraft R.D.F. etc.  By way of preface to Volume I notes are included on German sabotage methods the 'S plan of the I.R.A. and the German and Italian Secret Police, i INTRODUCTION.  ' 8.  APPENDIX A  ECONOMIC OBJECTIVES IN GERMAN EUROPE.  NOVEMBER 1942.  A. TRANSPORT. 1. Looomotives including locomotive construction and repairs 2. Tyres stocks and factories . 3. Ships and barges ineluding shipbuilding . 4. Wagons ineluding construction and repairs . B. FUEL AMS POWER. 1. Oil stocks and sources of production . 2. Electric power generating stations and sub stations 3. Coke ovens 4. Ccal mines. 5. Manufacture of heavy electrical equipment  especially transformers 0. RAW MATERIALS. 1 Steel alloy materials especially tungsten molybdenum chrome nickel .  2. Copper. 3. Pyrites ''' 4. Iron ore especially high-grade non-phosphoric . §. Alumina. 6. Bauxite. . D. SEMI-MANUFACTURED MATERIALS 1. Leather 2 Wool and woolled skins 3 Textile fibres including rayon and staple fibre 4. Wood pulp and paper especially kraft E. MAMUFACTORING INDUSTRIES. 1. Specialised engineering components for armaments vehicles etc. e g ball bearings ignition  equipment 2 Manufacture of gauges jigs tools grinding wheels etc. 3 Instruments.  4. Radio equipment NOTE No general recommendations can be included on food targets as the priority accorded to them differs widely as between one country and another dependent upon the extent to which a surplus is available for export to Germany., VOLUME I MISCELLANEOUS INDUSTRIES. TABLE OF CONTENTS.  Introduction. Section I  Section II - Section III - Section IV - Section V Section VI - Section VII -  Section VIII- Section IX - Section X Section XI -   Section XII - Section XIII- Section XIV -   Notes on Sabotage.   a German Sabotage Methods.  b I.R.A. Sabotage Plan.  c German and Italian Secret Police. Damage by Fire and Water. Rubber Manufacture and Tyres. Treatment of Mineral Ores. Collieries. Coke Ovens. Iron and Steel including Casting and F0rging .  Alumina and Aluminium. Leather. Wool and Woolled Skins. Cellulose Materials.   a Wood Pulp and Paper.  b Flax.  c Hemp and Manila.  d Rayon and Staple Fibre. Optical Instruments. Ball and Roller Bearings. Abrasives and Grinding Wheels., SECTION I. 1.  a . NOTE ON GERMAN SABOTAGE.  German sabotage during the invasion of Poland was carried out as part and parcel of the military operations. The same characterised the attacks on Noiway and Holland. This concentration of effort was preceded by the collection of the most detailed information probably over a period of years and by the training of saboteurs in specialised courses.  Preparatory Periods ' 5  During the period of preparation all aspects of the problem were exhaustively studied. This included  Economic social and political  conditions. Thus a questionnaire to Gbrman agents in Holland issued early in 1940. asked for the exact quantities locations and commercial qualities of stocks of rubber 'metals oil cereals. Special attention was also to be paid to the exact locations and sizes of large garages repair shops petrol stores telephone exchanges wireless and other   . war material factories warehouses and barracks.  . Military' organisation and dispositions with particular reference to mobilisation stores depots and arsenals.  Topography. In Poland an organised body of agents disguised as tramps was used to reconnoitre rail and road communicatiohs each year and to report developments A special feature was the upkeep of largescale town plans on which the locations of all military headquarters ...centres of local government and communications and other details referred to above were accurately entered.  Psychological factors. The overconfidence of the Poles the coma of the Norwegians the trustfulness of the Dutch. Adherents were gained over by exploiting incompatabilities such as the fact that many senior Norwegian officers and officials were out of sympathy with their Government.  The organisation-of intensive pro paganda and the provision of large funds for minorities and indigenous Nazi political parties.  As. is known sabotage and subversive activities generally are controlled by the Auslands Organisation working through German official representatives to a network of agents covering the whole country concerned. The link is through special attaches cultural press and so forth travel agencies commercial travellers and tourists., SSCTION 1 a .  3. Training. -   Tiia second noteworthy point in the pre paratory period is the specialised training of personnel for sabotage duties.  Thus special 2-3 week courses were held in Germany for deserters from the Polish Army and for the Hitler-Jugend of German minorities who were classified according to their knowledge of the language. Members of the German Hitler-Jugend were called up in December 1938 for a three months' course comprising parachute jumping sending information to aircraft and the use of explosives.  When trainee they were liable to be called up on mobilisation.Courses for instructors and leaders were also held. Their main jobs were to reconnoitre and organise and they were destined to be sent into Poland on or just before the outbreak of war. All these went through refresher courses in August 1939.  Before Norway men were trained' in all details of local topography especially of ports and in the habits .of local officials.  Before the invasion of Holland parties were trained in the silent approach and removal of demolition charges by night.  In general thousands of Germans were specially trained in foreign languages and even dialects and were sent on tours of the districts for which they were earmarked.  A special feature was instruction in inter communication the use of wireless and codas.  Lastly on German military manoeuvres in peace troops were practised in sabotage they attacked.and over-powered officials such as railway servants who. were purposely not warned in order to render the training thoroughly realistic.  Immediate Preparation.  Efforts were concentrated on the final training and preparation of agents to be introduced into the foreign territory. Thus ex-officials of the German Customs were called up and despatched to the frontier districts they knew intimately in order to serve as guides to saboteurs and lead them by paths and tracks at night.to their objectives. Identification papers were forged. Uniforms were procured by smuggling out from the country concerned or from those taken from deserters and were issued. German soldiers were also given civilian disguises. Elaborate instructions were distributed for carrying out demolition' cutting and tapping telegraph and telephone lines.  A German Memorandum for the Information of all Troops was captured on the second day of the invasion of Poland. It described who were likely to help the German troops and how it included information on the fighting section of German and, S5CTI0N 1 a  3. other minqritie-s. The signals signs of recognition and passwords that would be used were mentioned special badges brassards or articles of apparel weapons of a particular type and date of manufacture the word ECHO .to be spoken as written in all languages was the password to be used by members of all minorities. It was explained that some minorities not serving With the Polish Army would yet wear Polish.uniforms while others would be recognised by their above identification marks. Much the same procedure was arranged for Holland where the Dutch Nazi Party N.S.B. played a prominent part.  In Poland and Holland short-wave wireless sets were introduced and hidden. In Poland supplies of petrol and food were collected for the mechanised formations.  Preparations were assisted by the Irrefuehrungabteilung of the General Staff whose function it was to spread false reports and rumours and by a irequent reluctance to arrest suspects during the period of tension notably in Poland.  Introduction of Saboteurs.  In general three methods were used. Individuals or small parties ware larded along or behind the front by parachute usually in the evening or while air raids were in progress seldom at night. Some had bicycles wireless sets explosives-. Where possible landings were effected in areas where there were German minorities or inhabitants and the parachutists were given maps showing their locations addresses and method of recognition. In certain cases these people were armed and organised into bands where this had not already been arranged.  Secondly saboteurs were rushed in on motor-cycles o.r in transport of local-make and mingled with refugees.  The third method was to send or smuggle saboteurs into the country shortly before the invasion. For example a German soldier whose mother lived-in Holland was made to go there at the beginning of May ostensibly on leave and given civilian clothes for the purpose.  Sabotage Objectives. '  These call for no particular comment on the material side but showed considerable originality in special methods for communicating results immediately to the German authorities and for signalling to German aircraft. Tapped telephone conversations were reported by short wave wireless sets. Telephones were much used for issuing false orders especially at night. One of the main  weapons was the sabotage of organisation and morale by spreading exaggerated stories causing panic among retreating troops and stragglers.  This last method was ued in every case and frequently resulted in suspicion psychosis which caused inordinate delays while reports or credentials were being verified and in over-secrecy rendering efficient co-operation impossible., SECTION I.  b  4. NOTE ON S PLAN OF I.R.A.  The Plan pointed out that action was not to be taken when war or a major crisis existed  public opionion too much inflamed but when major trouble was anticipated to exploit potential panic and if possible at the beginning of winter darfcne helpful to subversive activities .  The Plan was divided into two Sections - Propaganda and Action -and the latter into two main branches -Direct and Political -bur no attempt was made to divjda Direct Action into tactical or strategical 'onsiderations.  Under Direct Action it was noted that   1 Aeroplane and mixnition factories and stores so well guarded as to provide very inaccessible targets.  2 Public Services are justifiable objectives.  3 Key industries to be attacked if accessible.  4 Commerce banking shipping ordinary industries constitute important target but political implications might render such action inexpedient. 1. PUBLIC SERVICES.  i Postal Service lends itself to wide range of destructive activity through pillar-boxes and smaller Post Offices.  .a Dropping incendiary material into post boxes.   b Despatch of incendiary packages.  c Major operation might be possible e.g. blockage of G.P.O. tunnel.  ii Telephone and Telegraph action . later stage. Tapping destruction of  iii instruments disconnection of Police Boxes and other important clearly defined lines cutting wires and cables.  iv Radio and Broadcasting provide doubtful type of operation. Inter ference sending conflicting disturbing news destruction of instruments or stations demolition of aerials.  v Cables usually well-marked and isolated places. Delay action mine might be employed., SECTION 1 b .  5.  vi Water essential to life and pollution etc. rigorously ruled out. Scarcity and rationing however a warrantable dislocation.. Delay action mines against exposed viaduct pipe-lines in isolated districts flooding being caused as well as shortage.  vii Drainage in large towns object of early stage attack. Method suggested is dumping bags of quick-setting cement in manholes.  vii.i Eire Brigade does not provide major operation for humanitarian reasons. Methods adopted by Black and Tans for cutting fire-hoses. As last stage of operation of diffused type false alarms could be raised.  ix Electricity. Detailed figures given to show importance and vulnerability of this service . Study of Grid maps would indicate towns which could be isolated by simultaneous attack on two or more alternative feeds. Stations and sub-stations in towns open to attack but lines in open country are easiest target. Delay action land-mine attention indicated but must be practically first action before defensive methods and patrolling are adopted. Sven if no action carried out inducement to initiate defensive methods and patrolling would be successful achievement. London eliminated as underground cables inaccessible. Birmingham centre recommended as first point of attack. Liverpools Manchester Leeds area as second.  Gas ruled out as damage could not be inflicted without loss of life and ever present danger of fire ensures that maximum precautions are taken. Latter consideration applies to petrol stores  explosive factories etc.   xi Government Offices are a legitimate target. 'Sympathetic' Government employee can deposit incendiary in cupboard etc. on Saturday afternoon. Older buildings offer more favourable targets. Admiralty W.O. F.O. etc. constitute early jobs and P.O.s Customs and Excise Offices Coastguard Stations etc. intermediate or late jobs.   xii Transport provides most important target as its serious dislocation would have paralysing effect on industrial and commercial .life and would dissipate energy by necessitating policy of protection and watchfulness., SECTION 1 b .  6.  a Sea. Incendiaries in sheds and ships' cargoes. Embargo on interference with navigational lights etc.  b Air. Military aviation a legitimate target. No action during flight in civil aviation only delaying action on ground  c Rail.Steam and electric latter including tubes. Action at sidings junctions locc-sheds involving no personal injury. Electric signal cabins would be target as nerve centres. Railway cloakrooms luggage stores sheds constitute first-class objective for incendiaries  1 Trams Trolley-Buses and Buses can all be tackled in garages incendiaries may be dropped in petrol tanks At late stage in campaign sugar or molasses or golden syrup in suitable capsules could be added to petrol.  e Privabe and Commercial transport open to attack at intermediate or late stage 2-KEY INDUSTRIES.  These constitute a very important target especially armament or aeroplane factories. Wellorganised or timed attack on particular key industry  might have crippling effect on re-armament programme. Magneto factories offer best examples. General location of particular key industries chemical coal cotton etc. indicated.  3. COMMERCE SHIPPING BANKING OTHER INDUSTRIES. Too wide in scope to commit to detail.  4. PRESS NEWSPAPERS. Recommended to devise some type of sand or spanner work which will ensure gradually increasing gumming up or disintegration of machines  5 MORAL SABOTAGE -AUXILIARY ARM.  I a Secure from every possible source clean stock of stationery letter-heads official envelopes rubber stamps etc. from Government and other Departments Instructions and documents of all kinds could then be counter feited. With use of imagination these could be used to co-operate with direct attack on certain objectives. Use of some safe and express method of delivery as the District Messenger Service recommended., SECTION 1 b  7.  b Desirable for I.R.A. members to join civil defence units' -e.g. A.R.P. Would give insight into precautions being taken would make them 'respectable' would serve as cloak badge pass etc. would prove useful in case of suspicion in tight corner.  c Destruction of National Register records. ADDENDUM TO DIRECT ACTION SECTION.  GENERAL PRINCIPLES.   N B These are given in full .  1.  Por every thousand men. Operations must therefore be so fool-proof and so certain in action as to afford a 10 000 1 margin of safety -i.e. freedom from detection or capture 2. Included in the very first series of operations should be those major operations at centres where the favourable population available is very small and where at a later date such major operations would be difficult. This would incidentally put off the scent those whose duty it would be to try to locate the headquarters of the organisers of the campaign. 3. The most major and 'centralised' operations should come first. This because at the first spot of bother all precautionary measures Special patrolling corps watch guards etc. will be put on a war-time basis. These will probably be sufficient to render operations of.this type impossible or much more chancy at a subsequent date. 4. '' The discovery action mine would give away the focal points of action the probable scope of activities -and still more vital the materials on which the. weapons are based. Ths procuring of even the most innocent.of these materials'at a subsequent date might conceivably arouse dangerous suspicions. Supplies adequate to the campaign of all materials down to the last item must therefore be laid in and suitably divided into at least three dumps in each area so that capture of one would inflict only a 33-l/3 blow al that area's organisation. 5. Since the avoidance of the discovery of a dud is important two units should be incorporated in every case where feasible instead of only one., SECTION 1 b  8. Note on the steps taken by ths Police to counter the applioation of the' S Plan.  Information was obtained several years ago of the formation of some such plan by the I.R.A. It was largely discredited by the authorities but the Special Branch maintained contact through informers and were therefore forewarned that things were coming to a head.  Lists of the names of the members were carefully docketed and a check kept on the movements of the alleged leaders in England.  Reports of intended overt acts were received but no steps were taken to prevent them since this might have entailed giving away sources of information and would not have countered the con spiracy at a time when the authorities were not pre pared to take strong action.  The commission of the first few overt acts demonstrated the truth of the reports previously received and greatly strengthened Police hands.  The leaders in each locality were rounded up after ths commission of the first overt act in that locality.  The immediate result of this was that members of the I.R.A. travelled outside their own locality to commit overt.acts in another locality.   N.B. This is the same procedure as was adopted by terrorist gangs in India and elsewhere. The Police then widened their net and pulled in larger numbers keeping all the persons named in information received under surveillance.  This action led to new members of the I.R.A. being sent over from Eire.  As a result regulations were passed tightening up admission to this country and providing for the deportation of those concerned or suspected of being concerned in the conspiracy.  It is doubtful whether the severe sentences imposed on those tried and convicted acted as a deterrent.  The chief deterrent and the reason for the failure of the conspiracy was the fact that the Police were alive to the whole matter made judicious use of informers and did not force the pace and most important of all -that public opinion was dead against the whole matter and the I.R.A. received no support from anyone in England.  The outbreak of war killed the whole business thereby proving the truth of the first premise in the ' S Plan itself., SECTION I.   c 9. GERMAN CONTRE-ESPIONAGE.  German Intelligence and Security work is divided between the Abwehr and the Sicherheitsdienst  S.D. . The Abwehr is the Intelligence and Security Service of the German High Command O.K.W. and comes under the control of the General Staff. It carries out all kinds of intelligence sabotage and oontre-espionage work which concern the Wehrmacht. The Sicherheitsdienst performs the same functions for the Party and State. It is under the control of Himmler who is also head of the S.S. and of the ordinary police.  Poth the Abwehr and the S.D. will be found in Amany in .occupied territory and in neutral states both run agents in Allied territory  both being Security Services may be of danger to' an Allied agent in the field. It can be imagined that the distinction between their spheres of work is not easy to define but it is always maintained on. paper collaboration is naturally-close though there are instances of inter-departmental rivalry.  The C.E. Section of the Abwahr is Abteilung III which is sub-divided into IIIC contreespionage in'Germany and IIIF contre-espiphage elsewhere 'there are also special sections concerned with military and industrial security. The C.E. Sections of the S.E. are Ant. IV which incorporates the Gestapo and Amt. V. which incorporates the Kripo Kriminaloplizei .  The Gestapo Geheimestaatspolizei and the  S.D. as a whole are officered and partly manned by members of the S.S. Members of these bodies who hold any rank hold it in the S.S. Gruppenfuhrer Sturmbannfuhrer etc. Members of the Abwehr. who hold rank hold it in the Wehrmacht. Many men however in all these bodies hold no rank-at all. The S.S.. Schutzstaffeln is a picked body of Nazis who have been trained into an incurable state of disciplined barbarism. The main body can be called on by the Gestapo for tasks beyond its scope -e.g. large scale round-ups and guarding concentration camps.  In occupied territories in addition to the Gestapo 'and S.S the Abwehr has as its disposal the G.F.P Geheimefeldpclizei which is similar to the British Field Security Police. The Gestapo but not the'G.F.P. is found operating in neutral countries e g there are considerable Gestapo organisations in Portugal and Turkey . In these cases of course its personnel will work in civilian clothes.  The Gestapo and the Kripo together constitute the Sicherheitspolizei Sipo or Security Police. They ore executive bodies the intelligence on which they work being provided by the Abwehr or the S.D In addition the ordinary police  Ordnungspolizei made up of the town constabulary  Schutspolizei or Schupo and the rural constabulary  Gendarmerie can be called in to help in the execution of Abwehr and S.D. operations they are, SECTION 1 c .  10. being recruited increasingly from the S.S. and many of their officers have received military training in the Waffen S.S. the S.S. military units . Finally in occupied countries the German  C.E. can count on different degrees of co-cperation from the local quisling police. The Sipo and the ordinary police when acting under their orders or in matters which might be held to fall within their sphere are not in Germany and German-occupied territory subject to the judicial checks which limit police activities in civilised countries. On their own authonLiy they can search premises revoke licences expel persons from a district make orders for the dismissal of employees or the termination of employment compel the disclosure of membership lists banking accounts etc. etck Their three most important weapons are   a - Warnings 1 these are frequently issued with the object of giving the impression that the suspect's every act is being watched and recorded.  b  Protective Custody . this is the reverse of the process common in civilised countries by which persons are arrested for their own protection opponents of the Nazi regime are imprisoned without trial for indefinite periods to protect the .regime against their activities.   c  Concentration Camps this is a prolonged form of the above. The reputation of these camps is sufficiently well known it has sometimes been found advisable for' prisoners to plead guilty in an ordinary court in order to avoid the risk of being sent ot a concentration camp after acquittal., 3 S .C T. IJLiL. 1 1.  SABOTAGi BY FI3E A1TO T/ATER.  SABOTAGE BYJim.  1. INTRODUCTION. Everyone is familiar with the enormous amount of damage caused by fire particularly in certain types of industrial undertakings.  Eire constitutes one of the best forms of sabotage for the following reasons   a In most cases all traces of the cause are destroyed.  b It can cause more destruction than a reasonable amount of explosive.  c It requires no special device to initiate.  d Sabotage is difficult to prove.  e The fire damage is usually considerably augmented by the water used to put it out. As a means of reducing the enemy war effort fire is thus of considerable importance.  2. CAUSEa CE EIRE. The Eire Office Committee of the British Insurance Companies states that in about 75% of the fires that occur in normal times the origin is never discovered in the remaining 25% the cause of the great majority is due to carelessness -e.g. throwing away cigarette ends in close proximity to combustible material.  In certain instances fires are caused through lack of foresight as was the case a few years ago when a large rubber warehouse in the London Docks was completely burned out and the surrounding property damaged. An attempt was made to thaw out the frozen hydraulic main which supplied power to a crane on the top floor a man set out to thaw the pipe with a blow lamp a high wind was blowing at the time and burning pieces of the felt insulation blew in under a door which gave immediate access to a stock of rubber thereby setting the whole building on fire.  There is also the instance of the French liner ''Normandie - which was seriously damaged in New York harbour through a fire caused by sparks from a welder s torch and eventually had to be scuttled., SECTION II.  2. A serious fire was caused in a power station  through the bursting of an oil pipe on one of the  turbines the oil spraved over an electric hot plate  in the basement which the turbine attendant had  forgotten to switch off. The roof of wooden  const.miction was completely burnt off and hundreds  of yards of cable many instruments and much equip  ment destroyed.  Electricians plumbers painters etc. can cause fires through careless use of blow lamps by placing.them with the flame directed against some hanging material etc.  Electric fires placed in close proximity  to a desk chair or clothing can quite easily start a fire as-will an ordinary domestic iron. Careless  ness may therefore' be fully exploited by the  intending fire-raiser as special devices need not  necessarily be employed.  GENERAL RuIEG NOR STARTU Q-. NINES .  Ignoring highly i n..flammablc materials  celluloid petrol etc. and non-inflammable materials concrete steel etc. the following rules are a general guide   a There must be a match to start a fire such as home-made or manufactured incendiaries electric fires gas jets blow lamps etc.  b A wick such as oily rags cotton waste wood shavings etc. is necessary to increase the flame to carry it to its main objective.  c In a building which is not easy to burn there must be an ample supply of kindling material such as pieces of wood. curtains wooden furniture and any other good burning material which will give sufficient time to set fire to the main target. Should it bo possible to make a certain amount of n-oiso without being ' discovered the doors should be splintered as it is most important that as large a broken surface as possible should bo obtained to allow the flames to burn frooly in air.  d It must bo borne in mind that only a few materials will burn without an adequate supply of air. Therefore good ventilation is essential and as much direct draught as possible should be provided by opening doors and windows. At night the black-out should not be interfered with as it is essential . that the presonco of the fire should not bo discovered too quickly. As there is always ' an up-current of air in buildings with stairs and lifts fires should bo started in their vicinity as near as possible to ground level, SECTION II.  3. thereby causing the fire to spread from'  floor to floor. 'Windy weather fs a  particularly good circumstance in which to.  start a fire and firemen dread this almost  as much as lack of water.   e Fires should be started as near as possible.to vertical/or sloping surfaces as they burn more readily than horizontal ones.  f Materials used f.o.r-.icihdling should C S not be in a compressed form but. should be loosened as much as possible to allow free access of air.-For instance books and Vi paper will not burn freely unless torn xi'p ' and scattered. 1  g With a view to causing maximum damage the efforts of the firemen may be obstructed by the methods outlined below  i . Disconnect automatic fire alarms.   ii I turning off stop-valves and bending over the spindles cutting hose pipes throwing away the nozzles and emptying the contents of . any chemical Extinguishers. -It may be possible to smash the. carburettors or otherwise sabotage petrol-driven fire pumps or interfere with the . power .supply to...electrically driven. .pumps by removing the fuse holders or breaking the fuses.. ' Where a. sprinkler system is installed steps should be taken to neutralise it by. the methods described in the ' second part of this paper. .   iii T fire it.may be advantageous to start a decoy fire in the vicinity. 1 4. INCENDIARY DEVICES. A number of incendiary devices are available which are of considerable assistance in producing the required amount of heat to ignite the' main objective. A list of the principal' pnes is given at Appendix A together with some.notes on their application.  A delay device will almost invariably be necessary both from the point of view. of. protecting the operator from injury and to give him t iiiie'to escape. This may comprise safety fuse time pencil igniter sulphuric acid ampoule or some other chemical or mechanical delay. ' .  There will often be-'cases where manufactured devices cannot be obtained but it is still possible to produce some extremely useful fuses delays primers and incendiaries from common materials. The subject of home-made incendiaries is dealt with in another volume of this Handbook., SECTION II.  4. 5. METHODS OF ATTACK. Methods will necessarily vary according to the nature of the target but Appendix 'S' contains brief instructions for dealing with a few represen tative targets  6. TARGETS. A list of industries vulnerable to in cendiarism is given at Appendix 'C.  SABOTAGE BY WATER AND SPRINKLER FIRE PROTECTION INSTALLATIONS.  1. DAMAGE BY WATER A. By the Use of Normal Eire Fighting Appliances. In the case of small fires in certain industries considerably more damage is caused by the water used for extinguishing than by the fire.  By starting a small fire in a workshop store or office by accidental5' means during working hours and then extinguishing it immediately by an excess of water and a liberal use of chemical appliances great damage would be caused.  This form of attack will be most effective where delicate machine tools and precision instruments and finished steel parts are to be found as in small arms works woodworking factories screw and nail and ball bearing factories andwarehouses. Damage is also caused by water in textile mills chemical works flour mills and granaries and to food stocks drawings records documents etc. Machinery thus attacked must be dismantled de-rusted and re-assembled.  This sabotage is practically insaisissable if not too often repeated.  B By Sprinkler Installations.   i Sprinkler installations are widely used in most countries as a means of extinguishing fires at their source in factories stores and warehouses wherever inflammable goods are in process of manufacture handling or storage. They function automatically on rise of temperature above a predetermined limit usually 155°F. by the fusion of a special soldering alloy or the bursting of a glass tube thereby releasing a valve seating and allowing a jet of water to issue from the pressure pipe-line system. This water jet of diameter, S2CTI01' II.  5. impin&os on a small circular sorratod deflector which scattors a spraj-over the area protected by the sprinkler generally a circle of 10 metros diameter.  The release of water from the sprinkler head actuates an alarm boll and calls the attention of the fire guards who may then adopt other means of fire fighting. If however at night stops arc taken to prevent the alarm functioning and a number of sprinkler heads bo actuated a large quantity of water v/111 be released silently and serious flooding should occur before the .attack is discovered.   ii Description of Installations. Two typos of installation aro in use   a The Wet Pipe Assembly Pig.I is installed whore there is no risk of freezing the piping system being filled with water under pressure up to the sprinkler heads.  b The Dry Pipe Assembly Pig.II is used in such cold climates as those of Russia Finland and Sweden where the water in the pipos is liable to freeze. Here the installation pipes arc charged with air at a moderate pressure and the water supply is held back beyond the roach of the frost by a double seated differential clack valve Pig.II -1 & 2 . On the opening of a sprinkler head the reduced air pressure is overcome by the water pressure which opens the clack valve and fills the system with water. All sprinkler installations arc provided with a main stop valve readily accessible from ground level and clearly indicated by notices inside and outside the building. Large buildings have multiple circuits each controlled by its ovm valve. In such eases a row of valves may be found  The handwheel of the stop valve is fined in the wide open position by means of a leather strap which can be cut in an emergency to close the valve -i.o. when d sprinkler head functions accidentally.  Stop valvos indicators and alarm cocks aro identical in the great majority of Continental installations., SECTXOJi.II.   iii fatcr -Supply to Sprinldor Intitnllr.tioas. Normal sprinkler installations arc feel by tro indopondont sources of suppily   a The-Primary Supply. A pressure t-.nk containing about 6 OlO gallons of 'i/atcr at a pressure of from 8C-110 lbs. per sq. in. usually located in tile basement or on the ground floor. The supply is sufficient to maintain some 1C sprinkler heads in operation simultaneously for about 30 minutos.  In some installations tho primary pressure tank is replaced by an elevated gravity tank usually situated on the roof or at the highest point of the factory at least 15 ft. above the highest sprinkler head. The capacity of these tanks is arrays much greater than that of the pressure tanks and in many eases maintains 10 heads in operation for moro than 12 hours.  Mien the primary supply is nearing exhaustion the secondary supply is brought into operation either automatically or by hand.   'fr Secondary Supply.  The principal source of mater may bo from public supply mains or bjr a special pumping installation uhic.h may bo operated by steam oil or electricity.  In cities and industrial concen trations provided v/ith public supply v/ator mains under pressure a direct connoction is made to the stop valvo of tho sprinkler installation. Then the pressure from the primary supply falls bolou a certain figure a clack valvo opens and the main supply comes into operation automatically.  In country districts and in largo isolated works the-secondary supply is obtained from a pumping unit draping water from a well lake or river. If tho pumps aro cloctrically driven they nay start automatically or may require starting by hand on the sounding of the alarm gong Stoam and diesol driven pumps arc goner'' ly started by hand.  In Germany and in tho Fr.nch textile areas round Rouen most of the instal lations are non-automatic and if no alarm is sounded tho duration of tho flow vi.11 bo limited by the capacity of the primary supply., D. 2 '79 M iin Slop Valve-. /Nniile-Plug Ox-k Alarm Ok k  lest Valve- for le-slmg Alarm . I Waste Valve. Alarm Valve-Clack. Alarm Valve-. Main I'Ve el to Sprmkle-r.s. K. Mam Water Supply Pi x-lo Installation. 9. Drain Pipe-. 10. Drip Union sliemn l y elotte-ei line- foi Automatic Draining of Ke-e-d Pipe to Alarm Motor. 11. Feed Pipe to Alarm Motor. 12. Oenne-e lion from Im-Iow Main Stop Valve to Pre-sseire- iaugi IS .. 11.1 3 ASSSMBLY. H. Connccliun Irom Alarm Valve-to I swirt- Gauge 16 . 14. Slra ami I adlm k l Mvure-Main Slop Valve open. 15. IVt-stim- Uuki-n-frnle-riiiR wain iiaurr Wow Main Slop Valvr. 16. PrrsMirr auirr rrfialrrmv wain t -m irr abava la L 4 Alaim Valvr., 0. 3180 References to the drawing 1 and 2 is a double-sealed clack constituting as it were one piece of which 1 the smaller forms the water seating holding back the water and 2 the larger the air seating. The area of 2 is eight times greater than the area of 1. This larger clack Is provided with  2A a rubber disc larger than and supported by the clack  2B a loose brass plate free to move at the centre pressing the rubber disc down on to the valve seating and  2C a plate by means of which the whole of the clack 1 and 2 may be lifted by hand. 3 is a cover. 4 is the water level governed by the drain pipe outlet forming a water seal. 5 is a spring catch or bolt fixed to the clack 1 and 2. 6 is the notched upright with which catch 5 engages.  7 a chamber between the two sealings ol the clack 1 and 2. open to the atmosphere and provided with a connection to the alarm motor.  8 a special union providing a relief or drip from the atmospheric chamber 7. 9 a handhole cover for access to atmospheric chamber 7. 10 an inlet for the water seal. 11 a removable cover to give access to the drip 8. 12 a three-way cock adjustable so that either the alarm valve or the air valve can be coupled to the alaim motor. 13 a test cock passing water Irom ABOVE he alarm valve but BELOW the air valve to drain pipe 17. 14-a lest cock passing water from ABOVE the air valve to drain pipe 17. 15 main water supply to the installation. 19 main leed to the sprinklers. 17 drain pipe. 17A main drain valve. 18 connection pipe between sprinkler pipe and accelerator. 19 body ol the accelerator. 20 accelerator air vessel the only communication between this and the body being through 21 a minute orilice arranged in a specially protected container. 22 a port connecting the air vessel to a chamber behind 23 a flexible diaphragm controlling the movement of 24 a plunger. 25 an air-tight valve opened by the falling of 28 abob-weight. 27 a small pressure release valve. 28 Inspection and re-settlng cover. 29 connection between the accelerator and the atmospheric chamber 7 of the air valve. 30 a loose plug lor Inspection of the accelerator valve. 31 and 32 stop valves on the accelerator connections. 33 alarm valve. 34 water pressure gauge connection. 35 outlet In the air valve lor alarm motor connec tion. 36 outlet In the alarm valve for alarm motor connection. 37 alarm valve clack. 9 annular groove of alarm valve seating.  39 main stop valve. Atr Valve The object of this valve Is to hold back the water at the point where It enters the Installation by means of a light air pressure In the Installation pipes. It Is so designed that any carelessness or want of attention resolves Itself Into the valve opening allowing the water to pass Into the Sprinkler Installation ringing the alarm gong and causing only temporary Inconvenience. All other valves Introduced for this purpose have the great disadvantage under similar circumstances of becoming locked shut cutting off the water supply from the sprinklers and giving no warning. Accelerator The object of this device Is to hasten the reduction of ihe air pressure above the air valve and to eliminate the differential principle of tho air valve Immediately upon the operation of a sprinkler. This means that the time taken for the water to get Into the system and to the open sprinkler and. therefore to the seat ol the fire Is shortened to a few seconds only. fio.ii DRY ri F ASS3.IBLY, D 2982.  Wine hook ..j Pad smeared with 1 petroljelly /notches Treated twine ofsufficient length to be initiated from the ground  Fig.jm Very rough sketches of Sprinkler De/ay Devices, 33CTIC1T II.  Very oonsidorable yatcr damage may therefore be anticipated if sprinkler installations can bo made to operate vithout raising the alarm   a In ell eases ./here the secondary supply is from public supply pressure vatcr mains.  b In all eases vhcrc the secondary supply pumps arc started automa tically. In non-automatic installations the duration of the flow will be limited by the capacity of tho primary supply tank -gravity tanks generally giving a greater supply than pressure tanks.  M3TE0D.   i See that the main stop valve is in the normal position-i.o. wide open.  ii Close the small plug cock Fig. 1-2 or Fig. II -12 or 12A by a quarter turn to the right in a clockwise direction thus shutting off the water to the alarm motor. V/laorc more-than one circuit exists all alarm cocks at one valve station should be so treated.  iii Treat selected sprinkler heads ns follows  a Time. Pencil Devices . A simple wire hook is made one end of which can be inserted between tho arms of tho sprinkler head tho other end being attached to the Bickford fuze portion of the assembly in such a manner that tho match-end is suspended just below the sprinkler head a time pencil with a delay of 15 or 30 minutes to which is attached   a length of about 4Bickford fuse the other end being provided with a match-end. Tho match-end is well smeared with petrol jolly the time pencil set in action and the assemblylifted into position by means of a jointed rod Fig.Ill illustrates this arrangemont.   b Home-Mada Devices. A piece of rag approximately 1 x 2 is wrapped round and bound on to a length of 6 of wire the projecting and of tho wire being bent in the form of a hook 4 matches are bound to the pad which is then smeared with petrol jelly. A length of sisal twine previously treated with potassium nitrate is attached in intimate contact with the match heads the twine acts as a time delay in the usual manner and sets, 3S TIC J IJ..  fire to the tar.toh lico&s \ liich in  turn i uitc the petrol jolly. Care alioulcl bo token that the fuse is  drica thoroughly r.nd handled carefully.  This method gives -..ido variations  in delay and is not so reliable as  the tinio pencil del y but as a purely  home-ra-ado expedient its use is justified ulrou other stores are not  available'. f is arrangement is shov.-n in Ft . IV.  2. DidL1CS BY 7/hon o'.ing to the nature of the building or its contents incendiary action -.rill bo more disastrous the sprinkler fire protection system should be put out of action prior to an attack.  ISgiOD.  Cut the loathor strap on the main stop valves close them and rosccurc them in the closed position l.-ith a no'..' strap arid padlock.   1T.B. Supplies of identical straps and padlocks arc available in the Til. II.  I a'feu installations in Franco tho strap is of steel. No stce1 straps arc available in tho u.k. and in such eases replacement should not be attempted.  Appendix 'C gives a classification of industrial aorks arranged according to susceptibility to damage a by water from ordinary fire fighting appliances b by water from sprinkler installations and c by firo favoured by denial of the use of the sprinkler installation., S3CTI0IT I.I. 9. LIST OF COtlviON .IKCBl-LIAaY P3VIC5 IviAl''LX 1ACTURED DEV I  1 Txai-i.9. A gelatine capsule contc. iaiag 2 os. of paraffin/ petrol mixture. Burns quiotl3r for up to 10 minutes. A 3pod soncral purpose incoadiary particularly uhen several are used together afth plenty of  xiolt and kindling material.  2 Pocket Incendiary An aluminium ponder incendiary aith the same range of delays as the pencil time fuse. Must have plenty of incendiary material round it as it burns for only 50 seconds. Tiio delay mechanism a ill net bo destroyed by firo. A 1 lb. aluminium ponder incs-ndinry. Burns at both ends nith an intense flame for 1 minute 2 minutes if train of quickmatch botveen the t .'o ends is removed . Hust have plenty of v/ick and kindling material round it.  4 Inco Miuux Bifcol 2 M.L. Flares trapped in sacking rith up to 6 Tar-baby tysulos. An oxccllont incendiary for igniting the heavier oils setting firo to warehouses etc. and all materials which require the application of heat for some minutes before they will ignite. A Itrlb. incendiary con taining a slow-burning Thermit. Burns with an intense flame for a short time arid produces slag which will burn through thin metal up to wood floors etc. Is useful for somo/ kinds of electrical machinery and for igniting petrol etc. in cans without previously opening the container.  6 2jg lb.-Theigmijt Very similar to Item 5  lircp Tiai but contains quick-burning commercial Thermit. Jill, SECTION II. 10. APPENDIX At.  6- -cent.  Firepot  8 2 Ho. I'la ncsim Iiicoiadiaip burr throush tiild steel plate possiblj'-up to i'' ip tliicknoss. Uscs ar. 11ora 5 above. A flat cylinclricr 1 in cendiary r/cighirra If lbs. and ignitod by a snail charge of Thcrv.it. On initiation it splutters molten uiacJicsium over an area of about 20 ft. diameter and the ease continues burning for about 10 minutes. Best used vhcrc there is plenty of kindling material but is also the most effective incendiary for using against v ood flooring and other not easily ignitnble materials. A straight magnesium incendiary ahieh burns for 10/15 minutes., 11  Appaimn b 1.  MBTII0D3 OP DHALIiTG ITK CDRTiJiT TAaGSTS.  OIL ST0CK3.  It is necessary to release the oil from its container by blov'ing n hole with an explosive charge opening a valve or othorv/iso.  If tho material is then allowed to spread it will not only be much easier to ignito but will carry the fire to adjoining tanks. Petrol kcrosino and alcohol may be readily ignited by anydelay action device and petrol can bo set on firo vhon in cans or vehicle tanks by tho explosion of a gun cotton primer in contact with the plate or a Thermit bomb. Diesel oil fuel oil and lubricating oils etc. require heating up before they will burn and this must be achieved with a plentiful supply of petrol or korosinc. Dor example the explosion with a primer of a can of petrol -will scatter tho burning liquid over the surface of the heavy oil and sot it alight or alternatively a l-rge incendiary parcel plentifully sonkod with kcrosino may be employed.  Koronino is more useful than petrol for general incendiary purposes as it evaporates much more slowly and burns much longer although with a loss not flame.  Further details regarding methods of attacking oil storage tanks are given in Volume II of this Handbook.  PITCH AID TAB STOCKS.  If stored in walls use an Incendiary Parcel. Float it on the surface of the tar if necessary using a pioco of -wood. If stored in tanks use incendiary parcel linked with charge as for oil stocks unless tar can bo drained out. Cnee it is well heated both pitch and tar burn well and give off donso fumes.  Phi..T STORES.  The contents of a drum of paint or two or throe tins should bo poured on to the floor and then sot alight with any incendiary. If this is impossible couple the incendiary with a small charge 1 on. of H.L. and place charge below a drum.  Hhoro tho paint is stored on wooden sholvos it will usually bo sufficient to set firo to the wooden structure but some of the contents should bo spilt if possible.  PAPER STOCKS.  Open and spread out as many packages as pocsiblo. A considerable amount of kindling material will be required to get a big stock well alight. Small charges placed amongst tho packages ..ill help con siderably to spread the fire but paper in bales or rolls is not likely to bo completely consunod., 3ECTI0I II.  APPENDIE 'B1.  RUBBER PORES.  Start tlic fire in the rar material stores providing those form part of tho main building. If all tho rubber is in compressed bales split one open and use as much kindling materiel as possible Somiproccosod rubber is often stored on r.oodcn shelves and this uay be. a good point at nhich to start a fire. Rubber is difficult to ignite and a hot incendiary of long duration is required. Sponge rubber crumbled up is very inflammable  BJ-'GINEERII'G-PORES.  Stores adjacent to machine shops or tho paint stores if in the main buildings nro good points at ..'hieh to start a fire. The packing department or carpenter's shop arc other good points if they are not too f ar froci. the -machine shops. Tho pattern store of a foundry is arrays a vital target. Apply the general ruiea--s-b ierd' previously.  DRAPING QSPTCES AND. BLUE PRINT STORES.  There is arrays much inflammable material about  and there should be no difficulty in obtaining a good  fire. Spread tho drawings about if possible. There  ..111 probably be a sprinkler installation.  RAILWAY GOODS SHEDS.  These arc often old timber constructions very draughty and with much dry packing material lying about. These arc good targets and can be easily burnt if tho general rules -are remembered'.  TJhoro these aro of wooden construction no great difficulty should bo experienced in burning them dawn. Warehouses.of concrete construction arc more difficult. The fire should-be started amongst those goods that arc most inflammable preferably at several places some distance apart A sprinkler installation is to bo expected as Pell as fireproof walls and doors.  TANNERIES.  The drying hods arc the best point at which to. star.t .a.J ire . They aro usually of wooden construction with plenty of air circulation. Guard against tho fire being scon from outside the building too quickly.  Attack fuel tank of vehicles  TEPTILE FACTGRIEG  The most damaging attack can probably bo made on the carding machines as those shops contain large quantities of inflammable gossamer and loose fibre on tho machines and also stacks and bales of partly processed, SSCTION II  13. APH H IZ 'B .  TSZTILE FAGTORriS Cont.  materini in c. loose condition. The fire should be started in the centre of a heap of this material usinc a firopot or thermit bomb for preference in order to.give n good initial scatter of sparks and so  increase the chance of igniting the loose fibre on the machines. Hatches of the striko anywhere type may bo dropped into the carding hopper which will give a good chance of starting a firo.  ARTIillCIAL 3ILI[ RACTOR153.  The raw material either baled wood cellulose or cotton appears to offer the best target for incendiarism. Magnesium incendiaries should be placed in the interior of the stack in gaps between bales where the maximum funnel and draught effect can bo obtained. Combustion can bo assisted by breaking the bands on a number of bales and soaking the loose material with kerosino.  The framework of the spinning baths is made of impregnated -wood which would burn well when once properly started. Magnesium incendiaries could bo used for this purpose.  FLOUR HILLS.  Flour mills contain a considerable amount of light dry timber which is used for enclosing the conveyors elevators chutes etc. Long burning incondiarios such as magnesium bombs should be placed up against vertical wooden surfaces with as much kindling material as possible prcfcratsly at the foot of chutes or elevators.  Grain itself burns -well once the fire is well started and with free access of air soon becomes very difficult to extinguish. Petrol and koaosinc may be used to initiate such a firo.  SUGAR PuCFIILTRIRS.  Bags of crystallised sugar 'would bo the best target for incendiary attack and this may be initiated by moans of thermit or magnesium incondiarics. A number of bags should be opened up and the contents spread around the presence of wooden structures would bo of considerable assis tance ., 3ECTJCIiJL I.  14. KPI3UD1X ±C±.  CJA33IFI0ATIOH 01 D'iDirjTRIAL \iOKJi.  A. Tfiicro dr.mc.gc -.nd sorious nuisance can Tjo caused by water fron ordinarj r fir. fighting appliances after accidentally starting a small justification fir... All works equipped vita small machine tools. Small Arms '.forks. Precision Instrument Factories. Ball raid Roller Bearing 'Tories Electrical Instrument Works. Electrical Coil Winding 'Works. Kotor and Generator '.Tories. Motor Vehicle Works. Aoro-ongino '.Torks. Precision Tool and Gauge Departments Drai/ing and Record Offices. Spinning and Weaving Mills. Department Stores. Warehouses and Stores. Wireloss Equipment Works.  B. Whore damage and serious nuisance can be caused in works protected by sprinkler instal lations actuated intentionally in the absence of fire. Sprinklers arc only installed in buildings Which arc inflammable or in which combustible goods arc handled or made  Textile Kills handling Cotton Wool Linen  Jute Hemp and Silk. Carding Machinos . Combing Machines 3pinning Pramcs. Looms Artificial Silk Works. Artificial Silk Spinning and Fabricating. Granaries Silos and Flour Kills. Sugar Refineries Printing Works Chemical and Paint Works. Aircraft Assembly Plants using wood. Kotor Body Works. Dock Warehouses and Stores. Department Stores. Drawing and Record Offices Tclophone Ernehangcs. Photographic and Cine Films. Sugar Refinerics  C. Works -.. here serious damage can bo caused by fire Textile hills handling Cotton Wool Linen  Juto Hemp and Silk. Carding Machinos Combing Machines. Spinning Frames Looms. Silk and Artificial Silk Works.  Rubber Works. Vegetable Oil Wax and Soap Works. Oil Extraction Works., SUCTION II  15. UNELDIT. 'C'.  C. cont. G-rc .ao.rios r.nd Elour Mills. Sugar RoIiuorios. Sr.v.' Mills Rood Working etc. Cabinet Works. \/p.rchouses and Stores. Chemical and Paint Works. Linoleum /orks. Garages. Photographic and Cine Films. Explosivcs Works. Petroleum Refineries.  Lists of Works protected by sprinklers in various countries arc available as are drawings of many individual installations showing particulars of vator supply and position of sprinkler heads., 1. SECTION III.  RUBBER .   .' INTRODUCTION.  Although a considerable Quantity of rubber is.known to have reached the en lay during 1942 by blockade runner and synthetic production fills over half the minimum requirementy supplies available are still short of the minimum needed to maintain the full A is effort Thus every ton of rubber natural  .synthetic or scrap which is destroyed means that some activity essential to the Axis-war effort cannot be carried on. .  The position is tending to become easier as synthetic production increases but deterioration of the supply situation is so far advanced that it will remain strained in 1943 even if imports from the Ear East are on a considerably larger scale than at present seems likely. Manufacturing capacity is probably in excess of requirements.  . Rubber in all its forms is graded 1 the highest priority for attack.  2. WAR.USES OF RUBBER Rubber is a vital raw material in modern war for a wide'range of applications of which the following are the most important  Tyres -for aircraft and motor transport.  Masks -for oxygen and anti-gas. Tubing -for hosepiping instruments etc. Cushions-for aircraft .  Buffers -for gun recuperators. Conveyor  Belts -for transporting material in mines and industrial undertakings. Ebonite -for insulation in electrical  machinery casings for submarine accumulators etc.  RUBBER PLANTATIONS..  3. NATURAL RUBBER. ' ' / Natural rubber is derived f rom the milky sap of the rubber tree cultivated' in the Dutch East Indies Malaya Ceylon Africa Brazil and Central  . Aaerioa. .  4. PLANTATION OPERATIONS . The juice or Latex is tapped by a single fine-spiral cut in the bark half way round the stem. Only the' bark and not the wood of the stem should be pierced. If the wood is cut there is an excessive flow of latex and a bark scar is formed v/hich makes subsequent cutting in the same place impossible., SECTION III.  2. Periodical tapping is practised in some cases on  alternate days with rest intervals of about three  months in each year. An average yield of crude rubber is about 3 lb. per tree per year but in Ceylon yields of 25 lb. have been obtained from a single tree Trees are ready for tapping after five years' growth  and will produce rubber for about seven years. The  latex is collected in tins glass cups or coconut shells fixed at the bottom of the cut. Each cup will contain about half a litre. These are emptied into  larger containers and finally into tank wagons in  which the latex is taken to the plantation factory.  Latex consists of about two-thirds water and one-third very fine rubber particles in suspension It has a milky white appearance. If intended for export as latex it is concentrated by centrifugal machines to 66 rubber and 34 water and for transit either in drums or tankers the latex must be made alkaline by the addition of ammonia to prevent coagulation.  5. COAGULATION. The rubber is separated from the suspension by coagulation with acetic or formic acid in wooden troughs about 8 ft. long and 3 ft. wide lined with aluminium. A grid of aluminium slats is then placed over the trough with the slats below the surface of the latex. Rubber will not adhere to the aluminiumi The latex is left in the trough overnight.  The rubber coagulates and separates out on the surface of the water between the slats forming spongy sheets about § thick.  The sheets are removed from the troughs and squeezed between wooden rollers to expel the water the thickness being reduced to about § .  6. SMOKING. The sheets are then hung on wooden frames for one day in smoke houses where they are subjected to the action of smoke from burning wood. The buildings are of wood with several floors each fitted with holes to allow the passage of the smoke.  One smoke house will cure about 300 tons of rubber per year.  Smoking gives the rubber a brown colour and preserves it from oxidation.  7. CREPE RUBBER. If the rubber is not smoked it is pale yellow and is known as crepe .  8. BALING. The sheets of smoked or crepe rubber are then squeezed in hydraulic presses into bales about 2 ft. cube bound by steel bands in which condition the rubber is shipped overseas., SECTION III.  . '3.  HUBBSR FACTORIES. .  9. MANUFAOWRING PROCESS Natural rubber is too soft for the manu facture of goods without further physical treatment and the addition of other constituents. In the raw state it becomes soft and tacky in hot weather  'and too hard and brittle when cold but if heated with sulphur or certain sulphur compounds it is less susceptible to temperature conditions and its toughness and resilience can be controlled. This process is known'as vulcanisation.  Rubber with 3% of sulphur is used for normal commercial purposes 10-15 sulphur gives a weak product of no commercial value but if 30 is used the product assumes different characteristics  . and is known as vulcanite or hard rubber.  The main processes in a rubber'factory are  Breaking down the-smoked sheets or converting the rubber from the spongy to th.e. plastic condition and mixing the ingredients oh rolls.  Applying the rubber to fabtfic-on a calender and cutting the fabric on a bias.  . Extrusions .   Vulcanising.. -  10 breaking down.  '-   The bales of crude rubber weighing about 2/cwt are removed from store debanded and kept for some hours in a warm atmosphere about 50° C. to soften. ' They .are. reduced to a convenient size for handling by cutting in an hydraulic press with a heavy single or multiple--bladed guillotine knife - jig -.1 ...  Wild African rubber requires additional treatment for removal-of the dirt and foreign matter usually present. This rubber-is ground between two rollers running at different speeds  about 90 and VO'superficial feet per minute  . respectively and is then washed. to' free it from bark dirt.and other foreign matter. Figs. 2 and 2a . -After washing ' the rubber is dried on trays in large Steam jacketted' chambers under a vacuum of about 24 .-. Fig.3 .  11 MASTICATORS.  The rubber is then passed to the masti cators which consist of'sets of large rolls about 2.'6 diameter revolving'at different speeds between which-the' material is passed several times until it assumes a' plastic condition. As the material adheres to' the rolls it is stripped off by an operator with a knife folded over and worked up until the desired consistency is attained., 'SECTION III.  4. 12. FILLERS AND VULCANISERS. Mineral and organic ingredients are next kneaded into the warm rubber for cheapening toughening colouring and vulcanising and generally controlling the desired physical characteristics of the product.  The filling materials normally used are chalk baryta kaolin zinc oxide lead oxide carbon black pitch and resin. Sulphur or antimony sulphide is added for vulcanisation.  Carbon black is mixed in quantities up to 30 0 and gives greatly increased resistance to wear this is particularly useful in the manufacture of tyres.  These materials are carefully weighed out into bins in the weighing room the composition   being varied in accordance with the specification for individual products . The bins are labelled to correspond with a charge for one mixing-machine.  13. MIXING. The .masticated plastic rubber is mixed with the fillers in mixing rolls until a uniform com position and consistency is attained. These rolls are about 84long and four to six machines are usually driven through a backshaft rotating at 70  r.p.m. by a 600/750 h.p. motor. In modern works this operation is per formed in a large machine known as a Banbury mixer which breaks down the rubber and at the same time incorporates the fillers Figs 4 and 4a . As heat is developed in this machine the vulcanisers are added at a later stage in order to avoid premature vulcanisation. The Banbury mixer is of very robust construction weighs about 50 tons and is driven by a 250 h.p. motor through reduction.gearing.  The charge of rubber and fillers is forced into the machine by a compressed air operated ram and the material is worked between two steel rollers revolving in opposite directions in waterjacketted casing. Gold water is also circulated through the. roller axles. The mixed charge of plasticised rubber is discharged automatically after 10yl5 minutes'mixing. In continental practice these machines are usually mounted on a staging supported by rolled steel stanchions of about 8 x 6 or 12 x 7 in order that a mixing roll can be mounted underneath to take the discharge.  All the bearings of the Banbury mixer are lubricated by forced feed using a standard machine grease and on the Continent the Helios system is used.  .After leaving the Banbury mixer the material is fed to ordinary mixing rolls which roll it into flat sheets about half an inch thick and also incorporate the vulcanising material Fig. 5 ., Fig. 2 -V.'ild Rubber Washing Machine -back view.  A315, Fig. 2a -Wild Rubber Washing Machine -front view.  Fig. 3 -Vacuum Dryer.  4 -Section through Banbury Mixer.  ', , .SECTION III.  14. CALENDERS MD CUTTING ON BIAS. The plastic mixture from the Banbury or mixing rolls is fed to the large calender rolls where the rubber is applied to woven fabric. These machines consist of three or more horizontal cylindrical rollers set in a robust vertical frame. The rubber is forced in between the two.upper rollers and meets the fabric between the middle and bottom rollers. If the bottom roller is rotated more slowly than the middle one the rubber is squeezed into the interstices of the fabric as in the case of the self-sealing fabric fitted round aircraft fuel tanks. If the two lower rollers revolve at the same speed the .'rubber is laid on the fabric in the form of a sheet as in the case of rubber belts for conveyors.  The thickness of.the sheeting can be controlled by screw adjustment through a hand wheel. The drive is by electric motor of up to 600 h.p. through heavy helical gearing. ' . .  Typical calenders are illustrated in Figs. 6 and 6a.  15 MODTIRLE fabrics. ..  Belts and tyres are'built up by the application of several layers of rubberised fabric covered by a thicker-layer of rubber material tinder pressure and vulcanisation intimate adhesion of the layers is assured.  The rubberised fabric is cut on-a bias in a special machine Fig. 7 and formed into the required thickness and shape on a tyre building machine Fig.-8 .  16. EXTRUDER OR FORCINC MACHINE. The milled hot plastic material is delivered from the mixer to the feed hopper of the extruder machines in the form of a continuous strip about IS wide and jj thick. The machine consists essentially of a heavy helical propeller shaft enclosed in a cast steel water-jadketted cylinder and driven by cast steel ' double helical reduction ge'ars. The action is-similar to that of a sausage machine. -the plastic material being . forced through a die opiate in the extruder head which imparts the desired form to the material such as a tyre tread section a plain transporter belt or a tubular form. - f .  The extruder machine-delivers the material on to a -fabric support which then t raver363 a long  line of machihes for sdbsequent treatment such as. multiple ply formation cutting to length for tyrs building etc .' Fig.. 9 i, SECTION.Ill  6  17. VULCANISING. The products made by the calenders and extrusion machines are vulcanised by placing them in steam heated chambers under pressure wherethey remain at about 120° 0. for about an hour. These chambers are designed specially to suit the article to be treated..  Tyre vulcanising machines are shown in Fig 10. The tread design is moulded under pressure while the rubber is still plastic and the continued application of heat in the same machine vulcanises the rubber. '  Conveyor belt vulcanisers are heavy machines through which a-continuous belt is passed horizontally in successive sections of 20 -30 ft. of belting up to 48 wide. They are fitted with hydraulic rams yihich squeeze the belt to the   required finished thickness Fig. 11 . 18. SYNTHETIC RUBBER. The majority of German rubber supplies are obtained by synthetic processes which are centralised in the main at Schkopau and Huls in Germany. Various processes exist but no details are available. The plant is however of heavy construction and vary extensive and is not therefore suitable.for small-scale operations.  19. VULNERABLE'POINTS. The natural sources of rubber available to the Japanese are now so great that action in the plantations is not justified. Incendiary action against baled rubber in warehouses at the port of shipment should however prove worth while.  As regards rubber in Europe the primary target is essentially the material itself whether in the crude or manufactured state or even scrap to be reclaimed. Rubber is rather difficult to ignite but once it Is burning well is extremely difficult to extinguish. Fire should therefore be the method of attack. Appendix 'A gives some notes on the instructions issued by the Ministry of Home Security covering the protection of rubber against fire which indicates the importance given to the subject in this country.  The manufacturing plant is a secondary target but may be worthy of attack as considerable disorganisation will occur if a plant in production has to shut down even if spare capacity is available. A small party should confine their attention to the driving motors gearing frames etc. of such machines as Banbury mixers or calenders. Alter natively steps may be taken to cut off the power supply by any of the methods described in the Volume dealing with Electric Power., Fig. 6 -Calender used for moulding unvulcanised plastic rubber sheet on to the fabric base. Rolls 30 diameter and 87 long.  Fi . 6a -Calender., , , , . SECTION III  7 Til s tyres on roa-d vehiG-I-ss are also frequently vulnerable to attack and a special note on this subject will be found at Appendix 'B'.  ACTION  A. Crude Manufactured and Scrap Rubber. Set fire to stocks'of rubber of all kinds. To obtain the best results the  .material should be opened up at the point of initiation and as much kindling material as possible should be provided. Hot longburnXng incendiaries such as the. 2. lb. magnesium incendiary Firepot and M.L Flare are- most suitable for. initiating the fire.  B. Banbury Mixers Mixing Rolls and Calenders. Attack with E.E. charges the large driving motors gears or frames. The two latter items are'likely to require heavy charges  Attack wj th small H.E.'' charges the . steel stanchions-which may be found supporting  .. the Banbury machine .. . -.  -C. Power Supply. ...  Attack the electric power supply.  Attack the process b'oiler plant x substantial resources-required .  D. Miscellaneous Large rolls may' be broken by feeding to them a substantial metal object such as a large spanner-or bar  y . Extrusion machines may be damaged by inserting bolts or other 'foreign bodies into the feed.  E. Tyres on Vehicles. See Appendix .1B7, SECTION III.  8. APPENDIX 'A .  EXTRACT FROM INSTRUCTIONS OF MINISTRY OF HOME SECURITY REGARDING PREVENTION OF FIRE IN STOCKS OF RUBBER.  1. CRUDE RUBBER. RECLAIM AND CRUMB.  a Not .more than 3 v/eeks requirements shall be held in the main factory building or 3 months' requirements on the factory sites. Adequate sprinkler or drencher fire fighter equipment and manpower must be available day and night.  b In warehouses not more than 50 tons of crude rubber and reclaim should be stored in stacks or piles crumb is limited to 5 ton stacks 10 ft. gangways between stacks. Stacks must be away from windows and doors. Not more than 200 tons in a building less than 4 000 sq.-ft. area. Rubber should not be stored above the ground floor. No inflammable material to be stored less than 40 ft. from rubber. Day and night watchmen should be provided-with suitable clocking system.   c Stacks in Open Air. Storage to be 50 ft from any building and 20 ft. from other material. Size of stacks as for crude rubber in warehouses. Precaution to be taken against exposure to direct sunlight and/or rays by refraction from mirrors glass or bright surfaces. Fire fighting equipment watchmen and manpower as for crude rubber in warehouses. Adequate static water with trailer pumps to be provided. Hydrants unreliable  2. CASINGS FOR REMOULDING AND SCRAP TYRES. Not more than 2 weeks' stocks to be stored in factory or 20-ton lots in open with 20 ft. gangways. Fire. fighting equipment as above.  3. FINISHED PRODUCTS. Maximum stocks in factory 200 tons or 2 weeks production. Excess stock to be warehoused and dispersed.  Premises to be fire-watched day and night and have adequate fire equipment and manpower., S3CTI0N III  9. APPENDIX B  ACTION AGAINST TYRES.  These notes are based on the standard practice of the Michelin Tyre Co. in this country.  1. GENERAL DETAILS OF DURABILITY. The estimated durability of a tyre 'oover is from 15 000 to SO 000 miles in the case of a giant or lorry cover this is increased to 30 000 to 30 000 miles. Re-treading which may be carried out normally once and exceptionally twice should be. effected before the last 3 000 miles of previous tread are worn out and should give a mileage equivalent to that of the new cover.  Tyresoling is not re-treading and is of inferior durability.  3.. OBJECT OE ATTACK.  Attacks should primarily be directed against giant covers in view of the.ir much greater weight of material. The aim should bet  fa -To cause a burst followe-d by fire and thus complete destruction of the cover. .   b To cause defection such as cuts or bruises which preclude re- The former method is obviously preferable  A burst necessarily occurs on a run and if the-cover is well heated violent and uhextinguishable fire is liable to break out. Michelin give definite advice that the vehicle shall not be stopped to inspect the burst but shall be run until the burst cover has been thrashed wide open and preferably torn off the rim.  Such fires are often uncontrollable and ignite the whole vehicle and its contents.  In the case of twin rims a burst followed by fire is facilitated by the fact that the collapse of one twin is frequently undetected extended overstrain on the other is incurred and the burst and fire result. The risk of fire from a burst twin is greater than that from a single wheel because there is dead space between twins that the passing air-stream cannot reach.  Covers can be made defective and incapable of re-treading by cutting or bruising beyond the circle of the greatest bulge but a small hole can be repaired by applying several broad strips of fabric round the inner surface, SECTION III.  10. APPENDIX 'B'.  of the cover. New tread will not adhere and will  break away under stress from such cut or bruised points  unfortunately covers are relatively invulnerable to slashers in this area.  3. METHODS OF ATTACK.  a Slash a giant cover right against the rim preferably into the head or up against the split rim or other clinching device. Such damage is irreparable.  b Attack the inner faces of twin covers by inserting a. double-bladed Y-shaped knife through the clearance between the twins twisting through a right-angle and withdrawing A deep cut in each twin would result probably penetrating the treads.  c Bruise the cover by procuring deflation on the run. A cover under normal load will certainly incur a bruise when the rim has revolved twenty times in a collapsed state  d Insert a stone between twin covers. This should cause a burst on the run., 1. SECTION IV.  MINERAL DRESSING PLANT.  1. INTRODQCTION The principal shortages of minerals in the Axis and Occupied countries are those required for the manufacture of steel alloys. There is also a shortage of high grade iron ore pyrites and copper. In the following paragraphs the supply position of the various ferrous and nonferrous minerals is discussed   a Steel Alloy Materials. The priority for attack on steel alloy materials varies from time to time as new sources appear or increased pro duction is obtained from old sources The following is the current position  December 1948  Nickel.  The Axis is at the moment short of nickel but the new nickel mine and smelting plant at Petsamo in Arctic Finland should improve the position when it comes into full-scale production. The smelting plant is likely to be out of action until Spring 1943 at lea t. Even if the ore could be moved to Germany for smelting a large under taking as the nickel content is only approximately 3% it is by no means certain that suitable furnaces are available there. Minimum annual consumption of nickel is estiimted as not less than 10 000 tons and current production excluding supplies from Petsamo 4 000 tons. Stocks are low and it will take some time-to make good the deficiency.  For many purposes however nickel can be substituted -e g. a Swedish alloy containing no nickel is available for electrical resistances- and nickel/ chrome/iron ore from Greece produces a nickel chrome iron pig suitable for armour plate .and other uses. Molybdenum can to some extent be substituted for nickel in certain special steels.  .Petsamo when the smelter is'again working is likely to remain 1 plus the highest priority-for attack and while the current shortage lasts-other pro duction in Norway and Greece is also graded 1 plus.  Molybdenum.  Molybdenum has unique properties as a steel alloy -e.g. toughness strength, SECTION IV.  2. and creep resistance which render it virtually essential for the production of all types of guns. German armour plate is a chrome-molybdenum steel containing 0.3 -0.4% molybdenum. and molybdenum steels have numerous other uses.  The outstanding target is the Knaben mine in Norway which possibly now after recent extensions may produce concentrates equivalent to 2 000 tons metal in ore per annum. Consumption in Enemy Europe is in the region of 3 800 tons metal per annum. Ouher sources of supply exist in Finland and Norway and very minor sources in Greece Roumania and Yugoslavia.  Estimates suggest a small potential shortage in 1943 but Knaben is still to some extent an unknown quantity.  Knaben is graded 1 plus the highest priority for attack tut the other producers except Matasvaara Finland Karelian Isthmus -capacity 600 tons per annum of metal are of no serious importance.  Chromium.  Germany ha control of a chrome ore output of something like 145 000 tons per annum against consumption running at the rate of approximately 205 000 tons per annum. Stocks are probably exhausted and the position is particularly acute as regards supplies of high grade ore. The deficiency of high grade chrome can only be relieved by the import of substantial quantities of ere from Turkey. Under the Clodius agreement Germany claims to be entitled to 135 000 tons in 1943 in exchange for armaments to a total value of Turkish  18 million. There is a possibility that the Turks will only release ore against German deliveries including armaments which may well reduce the quantity of chrome which Germany is able to secure to a much smaller figure than 135 000 tons.  Chromium steels are primarily casehardening since the chromium content gives a deeper penetration of the effect of heat treatment. The oil hardening types are usually utilised for heat treating forgings requiring great strength and toughness such as crank shafts gear wheels bearings etc. Chromite is also used in the manufacture of, SECTION IV.  3. rsfractory bricks and certain chemicals.  Even if supplies from Turkey materialise the Allatini mine in Yugo slaviaj the largest producer in Europe   about 30.000 tons ore and concentrate per annum will remain 1 plus the highest priority for attack. The bulk of this production is of high grade chrome Greek production mainly refractory grade and low grads chrome is also of great importance under present conditions.  Tungsten.  Tungsten is of great importance on. account of its use in the manufacture of high speed and other special steels as well as in armour piercing bullets. It is estimated that the enemy s current requirements in terms of wolfram concentrates are running at the rate of 6 000 tons a year while supplies for the current year will amount to only 4 500 tons. The remainder will be met from stocks which are about depleted and vigorous efforts are being made to develop the Spanish supplies. During 1942 Portugal is providing about 3 000 tons and Spain about 1 500 tons but with the development of the Spanish mines supplies are expected -to reach a level of 5 000. tons a year. Other sources of supply are of negligible importance.   b High Grade Iron Ore. ' The importation by the Axis of high grade iron ores from Sweden Spain and Norway is primarily to reduce the consumption of coke but also increases output from the furnacesi Over 10 000 000 tons of these ores are imported annually out of a total consumption of 80 000 000 tons. The ores mined in France mainly Lorraine and its vicinity 30 000 000 tons Germany and elsewhere have a low .iron content and a high phosphorus content.   c Copper. Production during 1943 is estimated to be in the region of 130 000 tons to. meet a probable minimum war requirement of 300 000 tons. Stocks and scrap recovery are con sidered quite inadequate to fill the gap which is being met by increased substitution   e.g. aluminium windings in electric motors and by pulling down overhead transmission lines of copper and replacing them with steel cable. The use of substitutes however creates many problems including the need to redesign much of the equipment in which they are used and involves sub stantial losses of electrical efficiency., SECTION IV.  4. Thus copper is a most important enemy deficiency at the present moment and the position is likely to deteriorate steadily.  The outstanding target is the Bor copper mines in Yugoslavia which produce about 40% of Axis-controlled output they are graded 1 plus the highest priority for attack.. The Outokumpu mines in  Finland producing about 18 .000 tons yearly of which about 15 000 are sent to Germany are a Iso important. Norway is responsible for a larger percentage of the enemy supply than Finland but most of the copper is produced and shipped to Germany in the form  of pyrites.   d Pyrites. Enemy sulphuric acid supplies in 1942 are estimated to have fallen short of minimum industrial requirements the largest quantities are consumed in the production of staple fibre rayon and fertilisers by something like 15%. Thsre is now an enormous surplus acid manufacturing capacity on the Continent which worked before the war largely on pyrites imported from Spain and elsewhere. The Spanish deposits are largely British owned and are thus denied to the enemy. The current shortage is due rather to labour and trans port difficulties than to any actual deficiency of pyrites or sulphur deposits in enemy Europe.  Although acid can be produced from raw sulphur mined chiefly in Sicily practically the entire raw sulphur production is at present consumed in the production of carbon bisulphide.  Pyrites production in 1941 was estimated as follows  Country Produ-Retained for Export to ction. domestic Germany. consumption. Italy 850 850 Norway 650 575 75 Germany 600 600 France 170 170 Yugoslavia 89 25 64 Finland 85 85 Poland 80 80 Greece 72 50 22 Belgium 60 60 and small production elsewhere..  Estimates for 1942 and 1943 are now in preparation and although they will include changes -e.g. increased imports from Yugo, SECTION IV.  5. slavia -the enemy is not believed to'have overcome his difficulties  e.g. France is exceedingly short of acid yet of a total estimated pro duction of .350 000 tons acid in 1942nearly 60 000 tons are already known to have been exported to Germany an abnormal traffic. The leading pyrites mines are graded 1 for attack .   a Metals not in very short supply. Lead There is no deficiency of lead for essential war purposes though limitations have been imposed on consumption for civil purposes particularly in the Occupied Territories. Some substitution has taken place -e.g. in accumulators and the covering of electric cables.  Magnesium. This is still one of the most plentiful metals in Axis Europe. No possi bility of shortage as the German production is very large and could be increased without insuper able difficulties.  f '   .Manganese. The manganese ore difficulties of German Europe which were on the point of becoming acute were alleviated'in the nick of time by the acquisi tion of the Nikopol mines about 100 miles due north of the Crimea. There are however signs that the res toration at Nikopol has not been sufficient to give  the desired tonnage though their potential capacity is  many times greater than  would be needed to meet all  German requirements. As  long as.Germany retains control of these mines the  manganese position can  ' probably be held. If the Germans should be forced to retreat the supply position would again become threatening, SECTION IV.  6. Tin. Although stocks are believed to be falling the'y are still substantial and with the economy measures which have been introduced the're is no deficiency. The really essential uses of tin in war are in fact few and Germany has ample sources of supply mainly as a by-product of the production cf ot-her metals. Quantities used are very small The avail ability of vanadium has helped materially to eke out the scanty supplies of other ferro-alloys  Zinc. Supplies' are believed to be adequate to cover all require ments for some time to come. O ing to the comfortable supply position .in fact zinc has been very largely used as a substitute for other metals in short supply.  t'  .'  2. MINERAL ORES. . A Metals are found in the earth in the form of oxides carbonates sulphides and silicates associated with oth.er mineral matter or in the metallic form as in the case of gold ' platinum etc. veined or impregnated in rock formations.' These agglomerates are called ores. . They must be crushed and ground to a convenient size for' .con centration preparatory to smelting .  '.In addition to ores of metals other minerals such as limestone gypsum shale asbestos rock barytes etc. and fused industrial products such as slag fertilisers and artificial abrasives must be crushed ground and screened. .  Ore can be either mined or quarried. The term mined is applied to ore found underground the operation taking place in artificial light. The term quarried is applied to ore1 found on the surface or sides of hills the operation taking place in daylight.  3. MINERAL DRESSING.' Most mineral substances are required by industry in a relatively high state of purity and in certain sizes. The raw materials are therefore subjected to a series of processes to achieve this end at the same time reducing freight and the tonnage to be smelted.  In every instance mineral dressing involves size reduction liberating and separating operations. In the preliminary operations -i.e. coarse and primary breaking -machines such as jaw and gyratory crushers are used intermediate and secondary, SECTION IV.  7. crushing takes place in reduction gyratory crushers cons and disc crushers etc and final reduction is effected by means of fine crushing and grinding. Crushing is a dry process grinding almost invariably  wet.  The development of crushing and grinding  -has necessitated a technique known as sizing since if crushing and grinding are to be efficiently carried out the sizes finer than those it is desired to break or grind must be removed.  The first sizing devices were stationary screens but these have largely been replaced by vibrating screens and trommels though the latte.r  'are now becoming obsolete. For sizing finer particles classifiers are preferred and their operation depends on the difference in the settling velocity of particles of different size   in water.   In recent years forces other than gravity have been used to separate minerals -i.e. megnetism as in the case of some iron ores. The ..latest method of mineral concentration is known as flotation . It utilises the characteristics of mineral particles to adhere either to the water in which they are immersed or to air bubbles. The particles are collected in a froth produced by the addition of certain chemicals to the water or remain in the pulp depending on whether they stick to the air or to the water. . .  In a ach case the flow sheet ' or sequence and arrangement of machines must be studied to determine the key points of the installation inter ference with which would result in the maximum dislocation of operations. The following notes give a brief description of the principal machines used in the preparation of various ores for smelting. These are considered under the following headings  Primary Crushers.  Secondary Crushers.  Grinding Mills.  ' Classifiers and Separators. Flotation Plant.  4. GENERAL NOTES ON CRUSHING AND GRINDING. The following table gives a combined classification of.various types of crushers and mills., SECTION IV.  8. LARGE Particles in ARRESTED Crushing Machines.  For example  Jaw. Gyratory- Pressure Cone. Disc.  Rolls.  SMALL ParticleS in SCREENED Crushing Machines  Breaking Breakingj - pressure with j Action For example Crushing' .hy and/or .or \ for ' tPendplum Mills  PressureJic   Grinding ' Impact A/ithout-. Shearing  dge Runners   Action Ball Mills  stamps VERT. SMALL. Particles in UNSCREENED Crushing Machine's.  For-example Shear jPans.Tube Mills T 4. ' Conical Mills  impact Disintegrators  -The raw material' dealt with may vary from lumps  weighing as much as a ton or more down to. pieces that will pass a 2 ring'. . -To facilitate shipment crushing generally takes place at the mines or quarriesand as these are often situated at great distances from the manufacturers works it is essential that the machines should be of robust construction and made from the. most durable material.  In modern practice the. ore as it comes from the mins is crushed in two steps down to a maximum fineness of g- Fig. 1 shows a diagrammatic layout of a crushing installation.  The coarse ore .is dumped into a bin and delivered by an automatic feeder over a grizzly to the primary breaker.- The product is then conveyed by a belt to an intermediate bin and thence by means of ah automatic feeder is delivered to an elevating belt -and discharged on .to a vibrating screen. This screen passes material which is' fine enough to enter the grinding section and the oversize is delivered to a cone crusher. The discharge is then conveyed with the undersize  from the screen by a belt conveyor to the fine bin and is then ready for grinding.  Crushing is invariably a dry process with the' exception that water is used to eliminate dust., SECTION IV. 9  5. GRIZZLIES. By means of a feeder such as the Ross chain feeder the ore is passed to a bar screen or grizzly. The object is to provide a screen ahead of the p rimary breaker to by-pass the material that is already small enough to pass straight through the machine. Fig. 2 illustrates a Ross -chain feeder.  The grizzly is from six to twelve feet long and slightly wider than the stream of ore and set at a slope of from 45° to 60° to the horizontal. The bars are mild steel and generally wedge-shaped with the wider part uppermost. They are held together by long bolts at right angles to their length and kept apart by spacing washers. The distance between the bars at the upper end should be the same as the discharge of the crusher. To prevent choking the distance between the bars of the lower end should be slightly greater.  PRIMARY CRUSHERS.  6. JAW CRUSHERS. These machines the majority of which are constructed on the Blake principle comprise a connecting rod or pitman suspended from an eccentric on the flywheel shaft moving up and down as the shaft revplves. The pitman is connected by horizontal toggle plates to the back of the crusher frame and to the swing jaw. A's the rear toggle plate is fixed the swing jaw is pushed forward towards the fixed jaw. At each revolution the ore is crushed between the jaws and the smaller lumps drop downwards and are discharged when crushed to the required fineness. The distance between the bottom of the two jaws is maintained by the adjustment of the toggle plates and the' adjusting bolt which is integral with the frame. Jaw crushers usually have heavy cast steel frames pitmans toggle plates etc. the flywheel being cast iron. Fig. 3 illustrates a Blake jaw crusher.  The jaws usually have corrugated manganese renewable liners and the drive may be either by steam or electric motor but must be belt-driven  The size of the opening may.vary from 12  x 7 to 84 x 66 depending on the type cf material.  A Blake type crusher with feed opening of 84 x 60  will break up to 400/500 tons-per hour requiring  300 h.p at 125 r.p.m.  Approximate weights'of jaw crushehs are  Opening 12 x 7 -about 3 tons.  84 x 66' - 225 tons.  7. GYRATORY CRUSHERS. The primary breaker most commonly used in large plants is the gyratory crusher see Figs. 4 and 5 .   It consists essentially of a cast iron or cast steel gyrating head working inside a cast iron, SECTION IV.  10. crushing bowl which is fixed to the main frame. The crushing head is carried on a main shaft suspended from a cast iron snider the arms of which span the top of the opening . The shaft is suspended by   means of a forged steel nut housed in a massive coneshaped head free to move within the throat walls.  The lower part of the main shaft fits into a sleeve set in an eccentric to which is keyed the bevel driving gear.  The whole driving assembly is. protected by means of a dust shield. The countershaft carrying the eccentric causes the main shaft to gyrate and with it the crushing head thereby giving it a circular and rolling movement. This may be simply illustrated by holding a pencil in an upright position the top end being firmly held while the bottom is moved in a circle. The size of the product is regulated by the distance betweenthe bottom edges of the crushing head and the bowl when they are farthest apart.  The crushing action is on the same principle as the jaw crusher the lumps of ore being broken between the crushing head and the bowl. The resultant products when the bottom of the head and the bowl are at their maximum distance fall on to a diaphragm and are discharged through the spout.  The eccentric bearing gearing counter shaft and its bearing are usually contained in a single chamber and are pressure lubricated by oil from a large oil reservoir in the bottom plate of the machine. In some systems a reserve supply of oil is kept in a tank below the crusher structure which is easily accessible for cleaning.  The lubricating oil is usually a mixture of heavy and medium motor oil. Tj s base of the reservoir is often surrounded with a coil for coolirg purposes which may also be used in cold climates to heat the oil by passing steam through the coil when starting up. The reservoir may be drained by removing the centre plug in the bottom plate.  Primary and secondary gyratory crushers can be directly connected to slow speed motors through a flexible coupling but the standard method of drive is still by belt and pulley.  Primary gyratory crushers are capable of dealing with lumps S x 34 up to 72 x 242 for example 8 x 34 maximum size of product 2 can deal with 35 tons per hour 72 x 242 maximum size of product 18 can deal with 3 400 tons per hour. The weight of the smaller size is about 9 -tons the larger weighs about 625 tons.  8. VIBRATING SCREEN. At this juncture it is usual to install a screen ahead of the secondary crusher to by-pass any ore which has already obtained the required fineness thereby increasing output. The modern method is to employ a heavy duty screen of the Hum-mer type Fig 6 .,  I. 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Fixed Jaw Face. Swing Jaw Face. Swing Jaw Stock. Toggle Seating. Front Toggle Plate. Toggle Seating. Back Toggle Plate. Springs or I.R. Buffers. Swing Jaw Shaft. Eccentric Shaft.  11 Pitman Bush. 13 Pitman. 14 Driving Pulley. 15 Loose Pulley not shown . 16 Toggle Block. 17 Wedge Block. 18 Flywheel with lugs. 19 Tension Rods. 20 Cheek Plates top . 20a Cheek Plates bottom . 21 Body. 22 Swing Jaw Shaft Bearing Caps. 23 Eccentric Shaft Bearing Caps. 24 Wedge for Swing Jaw Face. 25 Bolts for Wedge. 26 Bolts for Toggle Block. 27 Bolts for Wedge Block. 28 Eccentric Shaft Bearing Bush  bottom . 29 Eccentric Shaft Bearing Bush top . Fig.3 -Blake jaw crusher., Fig.4 -Gyratory crusher. Fig.5 -Gyratory crusher. P258, SECTION IV.  11. It consists of a fixed frame set on a slope across which is tightly stretched a woven wire screen of large diameter wires of hard wearing alloy. The frame is kept at the correct tension by means of spring loaded hook bolts and is vibrated by ona or more vibrators electrically worked which impart to the screen an upward jerk thereby throwing the large pieces of ore to the top of the bed and allowing the finer particles to pass through the  meshes. The screen is usually 4 ft. wide and from 5 to 10 ft. in length..  SECONDARY CRUSHEKS.  9. CONE CHUSH3RS. These comprise ordinary gyratory crushers as already described in paragraph 7 but arranged to accept and deliver smaller material and a special form known as the Symons cone crusher which is described below.  The Symons cone cfusher see Figs. 7 and 8 has a main shaft which instead of being suspended from a spider is supported on a large socket bearing just under the crushing head the bearing is protected from grit and dirt.  The main shaft is carried in a long gear driven eccentric which causes the head to gyrate the centre of gyration being at the apex of the crushing head.  The lumps of ore entering the crushing zone are cracked by short powerful strokes. At the bottom the head makes longer but not such powerful strokes which enables the ore in the final stages to be rapidly reduced and discharged. Special attention is drawn to the curved shape of the bowl which accounts for the large reduction ratio.  It will be noted that coarse buttress threads on the outer circumference of the bowl fit into corresponding threads on the inner side of the adjusting ring which is held down to the main frame by a circle of long heavy springs thus allowing the whole assembly to rise should uncrushable material enter. The Symons cone crusher has a heavy cast steel frame.  To adjust the bowl liner for wear or alter the size of the product without stopping a windlass and chain are attached to the bowl so that it can be rotated in the threads that support it in the adjusting ring.  For fine crushing the feed opening may vary from if ' to 11 size of t he cone from 2 ft. to 7 ft. diameter discharge from -jV to output from to 250 tons per hour.  The drive is the same as for primary and gyratory crushers but an efficient alternative consists of a number of V-shaped endless rubber belts, SECTION IV.  12. running on specially grooved pulleys which can be  easily adjusted by moving the motor.  10. DISC CRUSHER. This machine Fig. 9 comprises two  manganese steel saucer-shaped discs the concave sides facing each other. The outer crushing disc  has an opening in the centre the material being fed through a hopper into the cavity between the two discs. The outer disc is bolted to a flange which is part of a hollow shaft 20 carried in two main  bearings forming part of the frame. The hollow shaft is rotated by a pulley 3 situated between the frame bearings. The inner crushing disc is attached to a casting 44 with a spherical bearing at the back and is mounted on the taper dhaft 19  which passes through the hollow shaft. The taper shaft extends beyond the end of the hollow one to an eccentric pulley 18 . This pulley does not cause the inner shaft to rotate as it is not attached but merely imparts a gyratory motion causing the   inner disc to oscillate rapidly. The eccentric pulley rotates in the opposite direction to the hollow shaft pulley to increase the number of crushing nips. The two crushing discs however revolve in the same direction and at the same speed. There is no grinding action between the discs.  11. ROLL CHJSHERS. These are used for fine crushing and a number of types are available. The roll breaker operates by pressure and shear against a die ring or track and may comprise one or more rollers. Fig. 10 illustrates a single roll breaker.  Twin roll crushers comprise pairs of rotating rolls either fixed or held together by springs similar to the rolls of a domestic mangle. The rolls in the larger sizes are often driven by independent motors. In the smaller sizes the rolls may be either geared or belt driven Fig. 11 .  12. SWING HAMMER CRUSHERS. There are many of these impact pulverisers some with cages some with paddles some with fixed beaters and some with loose or pivoted hammers. Many of the larger types are now often found in plants for reducing cement rock having displaced gyratory and secondary breakers. Their field of service is usually limited to breaking down the less abrasive materials such as coal limestone shale phosphates gypsum barytes asbestos rock etc. It is claimed that they are capable of undertaking this work in a single operation crushing blocks up to 3' cube to a  finished product of 1 and under. The machine illustrated in Fig. 12 is of the swing hammer.type and is used primarily for crushing hard bituminous  coal., , Fig.9 -Disc crusher, //inert/  in ert. Henetenhie llaimnt r hp. / Iftitle  Discharge Arca l/nwtm k.  'Islow rusherHuse larxc Screen Har .\rra. So /Hunk Spots. Fig.12 -Swing hammer crusher. A261, SECTION IV.  13. GRINDING MILLS.  13. GRINDING. In this ths final stags the material frqm the crushing plant is fed together with water to one or more grinding units such as a ball mill or . rod mill in circuit with a classifier. A single stags grinding circuit is shown in Fig. 13 and is chiefly employed for coarse grinding down to about 65 mesh. For finer grinding this may be increased to a two-stage-grinding circuit in-soub cases combined with-a bowl classifier. This latter method can be used for any degree of grinding and the reason fcar the Introduction of the bowl classifier is to remove the undersized from the circuit at the earliest possible moment.  Ths actual reduction is obtained by means of pebbles rods or steel balls contained in a cylinder rotating about an axis parallel to its length. The material is crushed by the pounding action of the steel or bars and by the larger lumps of ths material itself much as the tstones. of the sea-shor are pounded into sand. . .  14. BALL MILLS. . . This mill consists primarily of a conical shell revolving on hollow trunnion bearings the ore entering by one trunnion and leaving by the other. The mill is kept about half full of high carbon or chrome steel balls of various sizes and i rotated at a speed which gives the maximum crushing and grinding effort as the material passes through the cylinder. Fig. 14 illustrates .a Hardinge ball mill.  Size-'varies from 4 T x 16 with an-output of IJ-tons per hour to 65 mesh or f tons per hour -J to 200 mesh to 10f x 72 with an. output of35 ton's-and 24 tons per hour respectively for the same reduction-. . .  In most cases the.mills are driven by a pinion mounted on a countershaft engaged with a gear wheel bolted to the shell-.  15. ROD.MILLS. . . A rod mill Fig 15 is a long cylindrical mill without grates using rods as the grinding medium.' In length it is usually twice it s. diameter. The'most widely used makes are Allis-Chalmers Hardinge and Marcy. The first two have hollow trunnion bearings at both ends the discharge opening being larger than the feed the Marcy rod mill   Fig. 16 has aftrunnion at the feed end only thedischarge  end being carried by' a ' tyre bolted to the shell and running on'two supporting rollers. The discharge opening is provided with a splash door  which swings on an independently supported hinge and in the closed position it is held a few inches clear of the discharge head leaving an annular opening through which the pulp can be discharged without  undue splash., SECTION IV.  14. 16. OTHER TYPES OF MILL. Another example is the Chilean mill Fig. 17 . Its grinding notion is similar to that of a garden roller and its action depends primarily on the weight of the roller. In more modern types increased capacity is obtained by the employment of more rollers of less weight running at higher speed as in the Ackron Mill.  Increased capacity is also obtained by the employment of centrifugal force to give'additional pressure to'the roller on the disc rings. Typical types are-the Huntingdon Mill Fig. 18 .and the Griffin Mill Fig. 19 .  CLASSIFIERS AND SEPARATORS.  17. CLASSIFIERS. Classifiers are utilised for the sizing of small particles mainly during the grinding process for their -operation they depend on the difference in the settling velocity of particles in water. No water other than that present-in the suspension being treated is required. Sizing classifiers may be divided into -   Sattling cones no moving parts . Mechanical classifiers moving parts .  18. SETTLING CONES. Generally settling cones are conical sheet metal shells with the apex at the bottom and ah overflow launder at the top. Feed'intake is. at. the top centre by means of a small cylindrical bottomless shell the function of which is to prevent the feed flowing directly to the launders. Slow settling grains are carried away with'the fluid to the launder whilst the fast settling grains are generally discharged through the bottom by means of a goose neck pipe the height of which can be adjusted to guide the sediment away from the tank.  An improved type is the Allen cone Fig.20 It has a conical sheet iron tank centre feed peripheral launder for the'slime and automatic sand discharge. The feed enters the centre pipe A is  .distributed by.the baffle B into the tank proper the sand settles out and the slime overflows into the lip or launder.  When the upper surface df the sand '.E' reaches the level shown in the drawing the water rises in the chamber 'C the float 'F' is lifted thereby releasing the ball valve 'J' closing it again as the level is lowered., Fig.13 -Closed circuit grinding unit  Fig.14 -Hardinge ball mill, , Eig.18 -Huntingdon mill.  Pulleyfirm on LooterHalf Pulley Body e/immafiM shear/cy stress mfc/h 'ina IX'i 'tfe Jc/m 'c/a ' V c Icu-rrM'/ IAleseucil near mn nii. in i itrear mainffMixt rtmct-'iy 4Mti typer fi&r. Pulleyho /.A d Mtoft cdoterajxdallouice mj/ rcpkccnectof Rail icdAt. tesripj icpAntt from Pulley My decreiiuy coj/ ofiicin/y pirlj  iixrCAvJ servecry aha aHous freedom cfdurdiryt from millenetki/yif prAcfrCi/lf dnf/ess any produc/ry a/aryer oufp if or a finer ora/rnaf. Fig.19 -Giant Griffin mill., SECTION IV.  15. 19. MBCHANICAL CLASSIFIERS.  a Ths Dorr classifier Eig. SI consists of a rectangular tank with sloping bottom closed at the lower end by a vertical wall the upper end being open and the mechanical raking mechanism is housed therein. The rakes are suspended by two hangers attached to cranks one at the overflow and the other at the sand discharge end. The head motion situated at the sand discharge end by means of gears pinions cranks etc. causes the rake blades to be dropped vertically into the sand which is then conveyed forward towards the discharge end. At the end of the stroke the blades are lifted and return to the point where they are again dropped into the sand ready for the next stroke. There are several variations of this type all working on the sample principle. The Akins classifier for instance has a special ribbon in a semi-cylindrical inclined tank instead of the rakes Fig. 22 .  b The Wilfley Table see Fig. 23 consists of a four-sided nearly rectangular deck sloping towards one of the longitudinal sides. This deck is actuated by a pitman and toggle which gives it a forward motion with a sharp jerk backwards. The upper side is provided with a feed box at the corner near the head motion and further along with a wash-water distributing box. The latter is a perforated trough fitted with fingers at the perforations to regulate the water flow. The deck is riffled with wooden cleats tacked on the linoleum-covered surface the cleats tapering in thickness from g- at the feed end to a thin edge near the concentrate end and are placed at if- ' centres. The ends of the riffles form a diagonal line so that about two-thirds of the deck is riffled and the rest bare. The concentrate is dis charged into a trough at the end of the table opposite the head motion end whilst the tailing is discharged into the launder at the lower longitudinal side. The tables are belt-driven.  Many other types of classifier exist.  20. MAGNETIC SEPARATORS. There are many minerals such as iron ore magnetite and franklinite which are readily attracted to the poles of a magnet and others less so such as zircon and pyrolusite while quartz acid silicates molybdenite apatite etc. are not. This form of separation is employed in the mediums of a air by stationary or moving magnets causing gravity fall or may be by means of moving belts b water by passing the pulp over tables belts etc. allowing the separated material to be either removed by gravity or wash sprays. The magnets can be either stationary or moving., SECTION IV.  16.  a Ball Norton Dry Separator. Eig. 24 . This consists of one or two rotating drums of non-magnetic metal surrounding a number of fixed magnets so arranged that consecutive poles are of opposite signs. In a two-roll drum separator the second drum has weaker magnets but revolves at a higher speed.  The materisl is fed in at 'A' and owing to the revolving of the rolls over the magnets the ore is separated into three products -   D -Concentrate C -Middling B -Tailing.   b Groendal Wet Separator. Fig. 25 This mchine is similar to the Ball Norton in that it consists of a drum of non-magnetic material enclosing a number of magnets 6 arranged radially and with alternate polarity. The drum is placed over a tank rreade in two compartments pulp flows from compartment 2 to compart ment 5 . The drum revolves and as it proceeds from 2 to 5 it dips into the pulp. The pulp is fed in throughthe launder at 1 feed water being forced up through the opening. 2 . The tailing is drawn off at 5 the middling at 4 and the concentrate at 3 . This machine is .used extensively in Europe.  FLOTATION.  21. GENERAL DESCRIPTION. Flotation is the commonest method of separating valuable minerals from dirt or gangue.  The separation process depends on the relative tendencies of different mineral sub stances to become coated with oil in the presence of water. On agitation with air the oiled particles attach themselves to the minute air bubbles ard are thereby lifted tothe surface in the form of froth or scum. The substances which reject an oil film and are only wotted with water sink to the bottom of the container. By altering the nature of the oil and froth forming medium selective separation can be effected between different minerals. The operation consists of three stages  The first is the oiling process in which a more or less oily substance is added to the wet pulp or slime of finely ground ore and water. The oil may be an essential oil such as eucalyptus or one of a wide range of organic substances. Selection of, , Fig.23 -Wilfley Table.  m  Fig.24 -Ball-Norton drum separator.  Fig.25 -Groendal wet magnetic separator.  A307, SECTION IV.  17. a suitable oil for a given ore is of great importance and requires preliminary investi gation. In some cases it is necessary to add a special reagent to the pulp to increase the difference in the oil attraction of the ore and gangue.  The next stage consists in the addition of some substance to assist the forme.tion of a stable froth when the liquid is aerated.  The third stage is the introduction of the air.  The largest class of ores treated by the flotation process consists of those containing the sulphide minerals of copper which often contain native copper gold and silver. These can generally be floated with the sulphide minerals in one concentrate. Any pyrites or other iron sulphides can usually be prevented from floating and passed out from the plant as the tailing.  The second largest class of ores which can be dealt with by flotation are those containing mixed sulphides of lead and zinc with or without pyrites.  Many minerals such as molybdenite graphite sulphur and coal can be concentrated by flotation but their treatment calls for specialised methods.  The production of metal from flotation concentrates takes place in such metallurgical operations as smelting refining etc the final product being the manufacturer's raw material. As a rule the flotation plant receives the crude ore from the grinding department and delivers one or more high grade concentrates in suitable form for the extraction of the metals.  22. DEFINITIONS. In dry crushing the fine portion of any product is referred to as FINES. In wet grinding and subsequent sections that part of the ore which is so fine that it remains in suspension in the water is termed SLIME the remainder being  classified as SAND.  The TAILING is that part of the mixture which does not enter a concentrate and is consequently rejected.  23. FLOTATION MACHINES. In flotation there are a great number of processes machines and reagents mostly protected by patent and it is not possible to describe them here. Most machines however fall into one of the following types namely mechanically agitated air lift or pneumatic., SECTION IV.  18. 24. MECHANICiJj AGITATOR. TypicPl of this type is the Kraut machine  Fig. 26 . It may consist of 1 2 and 4 cell units formed of welded mild steel plates The structure is extended above the level of the froth overflow lip to support the rotor mechanism. At one end there is an intake box and at the other end a dis charge box fitted with an adjustable weir over which the pulp is discharged. To prevent choking in the weir a sand gate is provided at the bottom. Each cell has free communication with the other.  The rotating portion consists of a hollow shaft to the lower part of which is attached a cylindrical rotor with helical vanes inthe annular space between shaft and rotor. The foot of the rotor is supported by a bearing fixed to the bottom of the tank the pulp entering through a number of large holes in the casting. ThP pulp is forced upwards by the helices against the conical hood and is finally discharged over the weir in t he discharge box.  25. AIR LIFT MACHINE. Since the advent of chemical promoters the air lift principle has become practical. The Southwestern Air Lift Machine Fig 27 consists of a V-shaped wood or steel trough with a header running over the top to which is fixed at 4 intervals a series of vertical down pipes through which is supplied the low pressure air.  An air lift chamber is formed by two vertical partitions running from end to end of the trough these partitions being an inch or two above the ends of the down pipes.  A few inches above the top of the air lift chamber is a curved deflector which directs the rising pulp downwards and against two vertical baffle plates. In this way the air bubbles are distributed evenly through the pulp and eventually the mineralised froth collects on the surface and is discharged into the launders. The pulp on the otbsr hand continues its downward passage and again enters the air lift chamber for further treatment. The advantage of this type is that it has no moving parts.  26. PNEUMATIC MACHINE. One of the better-known types of this class of machine is the Callow Macintosh Machine Fig. 28 . It consists of a shallow trough at the bottom of which is a hollow revolving rotor covered with porous material. The pulp enters through a feed opening at one end and is discharged at the other passing over the rotor perforalyed with § holes. The rotor has a sock of finely perforated rubber allowing the air to pass into the pulp the air being introduced into the rotor from the main supply by means of inlet joints through the hollow shafts.,  4 Deflector 8 l aunder  0 Froth Overflow Lip TAKING   LAND  LlM'NATQS  .CE inAif. - i I1  AIR INltT th endoai Ft 0 BOA 51A Nf  U / NAT0R -CONCrNTRATE -ROTOR Fig.28 -cDNffNiwt Callov -Maclntost' maohina. SOAPfR BARS f 0 Nl f TfltlNC GIANO 'tlM NA'C AID INltT  cctn OICMAM W0 M WHttl couniNGS itumouciR 20 ti. CELL 12 tr. CELL, SECTION IV.  19. The air bubbles issue from the top of the rotor where the hydraulic pressure is lowest and spread out as they rise the resultant froth overflowing into concentrate launders situated on either side of t he trough.  27. FINAL OPERATIONS. The slime is dried after flotation either by leaving in heap v to drain or by passing through drying kilns after which it is conveyed to storage bins for packing or bulk despatch.  26. TREATMENT OF INDIVIDUAL MINERALS. It is not possible to lay down hard and fast rules as to the types of plant likely to be employed in dealing with each kind of mineral. Not only do the minerals themselves differ considerably in their characteristics but the destination of the concentrate will also have a bearing upon the dressing methods adopted. However the following paragraphs are designed to give an indication of the method of treatment likely to be found in certain cases.   a Nickel. The ore is usually mined and has to be prepared in a sampling plant somewhat similar to that employed for copper. The following machines may be found  Gyratory Crushers. Roll Mills.  Hummer Screens. Roll Mills.  Vezin Classifiers   b Molybdenum. Molybdenum is obtained from molybdenite and wulfenite which are mined. Wulfenite ores concentrate readily by gravity methods. Molybdenite on account of its flaky character and resistance to wetting is not responsive to gravity concentration. Present success ful methods of recovery employ flotation. The following plant may be found -   Jaw Crusher. Marcy Mill Dorr Classifier. Callow Cells for Flotation. . Drag De-waterer.   c Chrome. Chrome is obtained from chromite ore of which about 50 is mined and 50 quarried. The European ores are mostly high grade  deposits necessitating only primary crushing  by a jaw crusher Blake and require no concentration other than hand sorting and respond to simple gravity concentration., SECTION IV.   d Tungsten This is obtained principally from wolfram ore. There are two general types of plant designed to treat two entirely different classes of ore but many of the machines are common to both such as   Gyratory or Jaw Crushers Trommels. Roll Mills . Impact Screens or Jigs. Wilfley Tables.   a Iron Ore Magnetite .  About 90 of the world's resources are quarried the remaining 10 mined. Most of the iron ore now mined or quarried is of sufficiently high grade to bo smelted without concentration. The plant required to prepare ore for smelting comprises  Grizzlies. Jaw Crushers. Vibrating Screens.  Magnetic Separators.. Ball Mills. Rake Classifiers. Wet Magnetic Separators.   f Pyrites. This is nearly always mined It can contain copper or other valuable minerals which may exist in sufficient quantities to warrant their extraction but the principal product is sulphur used for acid making. The plant used for preparation is similar to that required for iron ore    29. VULNERABLE POINTS. As with many other industries mines quarries and associated plant are entirely dependent upon power supply and as such installations are often found in remote parts of the world the power supply will frequently be vulnerable to attack .  The production of a mine may also be stopped by destroying the main winding engine and if in addition the pumps can be immobilised by cutting off their Source of power 'it. may take a very long time indeed to render a wet mine workable again Quarries however are not vulnerable in this way unless large mechanical excavators are used.  As has already been stated the object of a mineral dressing plant is to reduce the ore in size and then to separate the ore from the gangue. The size reduction process is usually carried out in successive 'stages in series whilst for concentration the process fans out into a number of parallel operations. The greatest damage can therefore usually be done in the primary and secondary crushing stages as without these the concentrating plant cannot operate., SECTION IV.  21. Jaw and Symons cone crushers are however of massive cast steel construction and are not suitable for attack by one or two men. The ordinary gyratory type does on the other hand offer possibilities owing to its cast iron frame. Subsidiary targets in this section of the plant are the various conveyorsrequired to lift the ore between each successive operation.  Should it not be possible to attack the mine or crushing plant consideration should be given to the concentration plant. Whilst in many cases the ore may be shipped crushed and hand picked for concentration elsewhere at the expense of transport the importance of the concentration plant increases as the percentage of concentrate in the raw ore decreases or where the process is a special one. The flow sheet in each case must be carefully studied in order to determine the bottlenecks in the process but the whole building may well be vulnerable to fire. The compressor plant also offers a good target of a general nature and its destruction may also have repercussions in the mine.  30 CONCLUSION.  The best targets are undoubtedly power supply and the main winding engine followed by primary and secondary crushers. In view of the very great variation in subsequent treatment other targets can only be determined by a consideration of each individual case.  ACTION.  A. GENERAL. In view of the large amount of mechanical handling which takes place in mineral dressing plants there is very little that can be done without explosives apart from incendiarism against buildings and the usual action against common machinery with abrasives restriction of lubrication sledge hammer or insertion of foreign bodies. Such methods will however have limited results as the majority of the plant is of very substantial construction in view of the heavy duty involved.  B. MINES. So far as the mines are concerned the same action as that described for Collieries Section V is generally applicable. Mines producing the ores of metals are however generally smaller than collieries ventilation is often induced naturally and cutting machines are seldom used. The power supply the main shaft winding engine the compressors and in certain circumstancesj the pumps are the best targets but each case must be considered on its  merits, SECTION IV.  22. The means of transport taking the produce to the shipping point should also be considered.  C. PRIMARY AND SECONDARY CRUSHING PLANT. 1. Gyratory Crushers other than Symons . Place several l lb. H.E. charges on the cast iron frame casting preferably the lower half in way of driving shaft.  2. Jaw Crushers. Place two Ig-lb. H.E. charges on the inner periphery of each flywheel about 90° apart except in the case of very large machines when 3 lb. charges should be used.  Attack main bearings with magnetic cavity charges if possible from lower half the aim being to drive some of the metal of the bearing housing into the shaft and so damage the journal.  3. Symons Cone Crushers. Not vulnerable to small charges but two  3 lb. charges may be placed on bevel drive.  NOTE If very large charges of the order of 50/100 lb can be employed they may be placed within the crusher frame of any of the above types. Driving motors may also be attacked by standard methods.  4. Miscellaneous Crushers. Place two § lb. H.E charges on each flywheel as already described under jaw crushers.  Attack bearings with magnetic cavity charges  as already described under jaw crushers.  Where the frame is of cast iron or there are cast iron bearihg pedestals place two or more charges where most damage is likely to be done.  Place small H.E charges on driving motors.  The vulnerable points of several types of  machines are indicated below  Disc Crusher Bearing pedestals.  Roll Crusher Flywheels.  Swing Hammer  Crusher Flywheels.  5. Elevators and Conveyors. Place site 11 H.E. charges on driving motors and gear-boxes which will be found at the top of each run.  Attack with incendiaries timber structures over conveyors and rubber belts., SECTION IV.  23. D. GRINDING PLANT. 1 Ball and Rod Mills.  Place l -lb. H.E. charges on trunnion bearing pedestals and/or on driving motors and gearing  2. Miscellaneous Mills. Place l lb. charges on any suitable iron casting of substantial size.  Attack driving motors and gears.  Possible vulnerable points of several types of machine are indicated below  Chilean Mill -The edge runners. Huntingdon Mill -Bearing pedestals main frame if cast iron. Griffin Mill -Framing of oscillating unit below pulley wheel.  E. CLASSIFIERS. SEPARATORS AND FLOTATION PLANT. Place Ig-lb. charges on driving motors pumps and gearing.  Place H.E. charges of the order of 5/10 lb inside the tanks of those machines containing water., 1. SECTION V.  COLLIERIES  1. INTRODUCTION There is -a very considerable shortage of coal and coke in Axis Europe and coal mine pro duction is always worth attacking. The degree of. deficiency is however considerably greater in the case of coking coal for conversion into furnace coke in coke ovens and where selection is practicable attacks should always be directed to mines producing coking coal. Coking coal is the main limiting factor in enemy iron and steel production . .  The main coking coal producing regions outside .Germany are -   Holland.  The Limburg coalfields  Belgium.  The Limburg coalfield also known as the Campine . Seven mines some f of which-export to the Ruhr and some' to coke ovens in Belgium.  South Belgian coalfield. Many mines particularly in the west.  Erance. ' .  Nord and Pas de Calais.. Certain seams in certain mines  St. Etienne coalfield. -   Poland. ' '  Polish Silesia A small proportion of the mines. The increase in the  . output of Polish hard coal has offset to .a great extent the continual decline elsewhere and the Polish mines are particularly important for attack .  Czechoslovakia.  The Min coking coal district was Moravska Ostrava in the territory .seized by Poland from Czechoslovakia in1938. -  All coalfields however produce some coking coal especially at deep levels. It can' be assumed that in the Occupied Territories practically all steam coal is destined for industries working for the enemy.  The leading coal mines producing mainly coking coal are graded 1 for attack., S3CTI0N V.  2. 2. COAL Coal is a product of conversion from wood and is found in all intermediate stages ranging from peat lignite or brown coal coking or bituminous to non-coking coal and anthracite.  There are many varieties of each class specially suitable for particular purposes such as domestic and central heating steam raising smithy purposes gas and coke making but with the exception of brown coal which is obtained by open working or quarrying all. are mined in the same way from deep underground workings and raised by vertical shaftsL . .  3 'COLLIERIES.  ' The equipment of collieries and their methods of working.vary considerably according to local conditions. There are however a number of features.whichare of general application. All collieries in which coal is mined from depth can be divided into two main divisions the below-ground workings and the surface installations the two being connected by means of vertical lifts more generally called cages. The terminal of the cages at the surface is known as the ' pit-head whilst the lower terminal is known as the . pit-bottom . Many pits work coal from a number of different levels simultaneously. ' -   The quarrying of lignite is a relatively simple operation -but like the mines will be dependent upon power supply To this extent some of the information.which follows will apply but no further reference will be made in this paper to open cast workings  4 UNDERGROUND WORKINGS   a General Arrangement. At the pit-bottom there will usually be found a marshalling yard for handling the pit tubs and a main road will run in the direction of the workings more usually downhill than uphill. The main road is of considerable width generally sufficiejib for two or more tub roads at least 6 ft. 6 ins high and   usually well lit.  ..f w  -As one walks away from the pit-bottom the main road becomes narrower and lower whilst branch roads diverge towards where coal is being worked. These branch roads have further subsidiary branches and cross-cuts which become progressively smaller until the working face is reached. In some'cases the face is of such small dimensions that it is only just possible to work in it in a prone position with hand tools., SECTION V.  3. Both main and branch roads are generally permanently supported but for the subsidiary comiaunications round poles about 6 in diameter known as pit props are used. The   principal roads are often provided with air locks for the purpose of controlling ventilation. Along the sides of the roads will be found a collection of pipes cables etc. -which convey electric power compressed air etc. for driving the various machines in the mine. Further wires'may be provided for operating the signalling system which is used in connection with the haulage of the tubs. b Methods of Cutting.. The coal may be min§.d .by means of hand  tools power-driven hand tools or by coal cutting machines In the Belgian -and Westphalian mines it is common to employ . a compressed air driven percussion hammer pick which is a lighter version of the ordinary r oad drill.  If cutters1are used however the coal is undercut by means of a coal cutting machine and subsequently brought down with explosive -1-....  When using a coal cutting.machine it is first necessary to drive a heading some 100 to 200 yards .long at the side of the seam to be cut and the machine-is then set up at the end nearest the. pit-bottom. The coal cutter is a long low machine having at the forward end a jib up to 9 ft. long which projects and cuts under the seam at right angles to the side of the machine. Round this jib a chain fitted with-cutting teeth runs horizontally at high speed and cuts out a groove about 51 ins. high from under the seam. There is. a haulage gear attached to the coal /cutter...which draws it along the-face of  .the seam by winding in a steel wire rope which is anchored at the end of the Working face The.cutter machines require about 50 h. p. and may be driven either by .an electric-motor or in' the case of gaseous pits by a compressed air motor taking air at about 60 lb per square inch.  When the length of seam has been completely underout a series of holes is drilled'in the coal face and a charge of explosive is placed in each hole on detonation the coal cleaves from the roof breaks up and subsides. Fig. 1 shows the general arrangement of two types of chain coal cutting machines.   c Transport. ' g As the tub roads will usually terminate at a distance from the working face it is, S5CTI0N V  4. necessary to make arrangements for trans porting the ooal from the faoe to the tubs. A system of portable conveyors is usually used which may be either of the belt scraper or jigger type and a number of these in series may be necessary to reach the terminus of the main haulage system.  The latter system consists of light tubs or wagons running on rails and drawn either by pony or by mechanical or electrical traction such as rope haulage endless chains battery locomotives and in some safe pits in Germany electric locomotives taking current from an overhead trolley wire are employed. When the haulage is carried out by rope or chain special haulage engines are requiredin which case the main road and the principal subsidiary roads will have their own haulage engines. These may be driven by steam electricity or compressed air and Figs. 2 and 3 illustrate typical electric and steam driven machines respectively.  In a large pit the haulage has to be highly organised which necessitates a system of signalling between the various points on the roads.  On arrival at the pit-bottom the tubs are loaded direct into the cages and hoisted to the surface the empty tubs being returned by the same route.   d Pumping. The incidence of water raises a big problem in a number of pits which would be flooded in the event of the pumps ceasing to operate. The pumps are usually of the multi-stage centrifugal type pumping to the surface or other suitable discharge. The pumps will be normal design high pressure type size and number will depend on the amount of water to be pumped and its position relative to the delivery point.  5. SURFACE INSTALLATIONS. The surface installations of a colliery are extensive and include the following  fa Power house.   b Pit-head gear.  c Compressor house.  d Ventilating plant.  e Screening and washing plant f Lamp room.  g Maintenance workshop.  h Stores., W621 FIG. 1 Chain Coal Cutting Machines., Bh  17622 FIG. 2 Self-contained Steam Haulage Engine., SECTION V 5..   a Power House. In view of the plentiful supplies of cheap coal available at a colliery power requirements are frequently generated in a plant at the colliery although a standby supply of electric power from the grid may also exist.  There will thus.be an engine or turbine room with adjacent boiler house.  Most'power houses will be equipped with medium steam pressure water tube boilers complete with superheater ' economiser and other usual boiler house equipment.  The turbines will be-of'normal design driving-A.C generators and if the colliery is-equipped with D.C. electric winding motors appropriate converting machinery will be installed.  If -as is. probable electric power. is available from the grid or1other external source transformers will be installed as part of the power house equipment.  The generators may be of various.types but are most commonly turbine-driven A.C. or D.C. generators. ..-The standby plant will comprise a transformer and either rectifiers or rotary converters . v   b Pit-head Gear. Pit-head gear consists of a main winding engine which may.be either a compound horizontal steam engine or an electric motor driving a large winding drum around which the steel cable supporting the cages is wound.The cable passes from the winding drum to the cages over two large wheels or sheaves from 10 ft. to 20 ft. in diameter supported vertically over the pit .shaft by a gantry built of structural steel or reinforced concrete-. -As. the cages are supported on the ends of the same winding rope one travels up as the other travels down and so approximately counterbalance each Qther.  Fig 4 shows three types of pit-head gear.  The.cages are constructed of Steel framing having several decks the shape and size of the cages' varying .according to local requirements.  The winding engines are all very substantial in construction as the working conditions are extremely onerous. In order to maintain a high output from the pit the Cages have to be worked at-great speed when the'miners are filling as any delay .in handling laden tubs will upset the entire cycle of operations and seriously reduce the output of the pit.. Cage speeds of as much as 70 m.p.h. are used 'which necessitates not only highly skilled operation but special- ' control gear.  The winding drum is of very substantial construction and will be made up of mild steel, SECTION Y.  6. plates or cast steel with the grooves for the rope very carefully machined sometimes a special conical drum is used. The check  -or side plates are also likely to be cast steel as the whole drum has to take very neavy stresses. Fig 5 shows a drum in course of manufacture.  The winding engine will be continuously manned but the various operations of starting braking and stopping and reversing whilst generally manually operated from a control platform with the aid of a sight indicator are automatically interlocked in varying degree by a system of valves and levers so that over-winding excessive braking etc. cannot occur.  With electrically driven winders similar protection is provided in the shape of specially designed limit switches etc.  Fig. 6 shows a compound steam driven winding engine and Fig-. 7 a D-.C. motor driven winding engine.   c Oompressor House. Although electric power is preferable for use in a coal mine t here are a number of gaseous pits in which its use would be dangerous. In such cases compressed air is employed as far as possible for below-rground power services. Even in safe pits however there are likely to be uses for compressed air particularly for the operation of percussion picks etc. Under these circumstances. the surface installations will include a compressor house supplying air up to about 100 lb. per square inch probably from 3-stage air compressors driven by steam turbines   d Ventilating Plant. The ventilation of a colliery is extremely Important and in many mines the lives of the miners depend completely on the artificial supply of fresh air and the removal of noxious gases. Ventilation is effected by circulating throughout the workings large volumes of air and arrangements have to be made so that the furthest recesses of the mine are adequately covered.  The circulation of the air is usually effected by large fans up to 15/17 ft. diameter either steam or motor driven direct coupled or through rope drives. The usual practice is for the fans to exhaust the foul air through a shaft known as the upcast the fresh air being driven in through a shaft known as the down-cast. The fans and engines or motors are housed on the surface in close proximity to the winding house and may be identified by the large diameter ducts., SECTION V.  7. .Fig. 8 shows steam-driven ventilating fans hnd Fig. 9 external view of..air ducts.   e Washing and Screening. On arriving ht the surface the tubs pass over a weighing plant and then proceed often by gravity to a series of belts and screens where the coal is first picked for waste and then sized by rotating or jigging screens. The over-size then passes direct to bunkers or to railway trucks situated below. The smaller sizes are passed from the screens to the washers where they are cleaned by either a continuous flow of water or by pulsating machinery tailings being discharged at a lower level than the coal and transferred by means of conveyors-to the dump. As in the case of the large c oal the washed small sizes are carried by elevators to storage bunkers or other required destination.  There is usually a marshalling yard in the vicinity of the screening and washing plant where the coal trains are made up prior to being despatched by the main railway.   f Lamp Room. With the exception of the main roads the majority of mine workings are not permanently illuminated so that it is necessary for each miner to takd down a lamp. These lamps are of special design in-order to meet safety regulations and are housed in the lamp room where they are also maintained. Each lamp is numbered and on going down the pit each man takes a lamp bearing his own check number so that the non-return of a lamp indicates that the owner has not returned to the surface and may consequently be injured underground and knowledge that he has not'returned will be registered.   g Maintenance Workshops and Stores. Every coal mine is provided with a wellequipped maintenance workshop which is capable of carrying out repairs of almost any description to any part of the colliery plant. Th'e smooth running of the colliery is dependent upon the efficiency of this workshop.  The stores form an important complement and will house many spare parts of the machinery and also contain stocks of lubricants tools etc. ' '  6. VULNERABLE POINTS.' A colliery is a complicated plant and comprises a number of separate installations each of which is essential to the functioning of the whole. The immobilisation of one of the main installations is therefore likely to' necessitate the closing down of the colliery until such time as repairs can be effected., SECTION V.  8. t  The vital installations are the power house with which may be included the compressors if these are relied upon for power underground the main winding engine and the.ventilating plant. In gaseous pits the destruction of the ventilating plant would be likely to have a lethal affect upon the men below ground and the desirability of carrying out an attack upon the fans will therefore have to be carefully considered in such oasss  There 'are in addition a number of secondary targets which though not necessarily vital to the colliery would have' a considerable effect on output if eliminated.  7. METHOD OF ATTACK. WITH EXPLOSIVES-.  The use' of service .explosives under ground is likely' to have catastrophic effect in mines subject to fire damp. Safety type explosives should however be available for normal shot firing at the 'face but larger ' quantities are likely to be required to obtain equivalent results.  Primary Targets.  1. Power House. Detailed instructions for attacking electric generating plant transformers etc. are given in the appropriate volume of the Handbook ' but the following will comprise the principal targets '.   a Turbo-generators.  b Rotary converters- if any .  c Boiler plant. -   d Air compressors.. - e ' J e' .'  e Transforme-'r ' for external supply. 2. Winding Engine. As this engine runs intermittently it is assumed that it will be.ntt-acked at rest ' such as at meal times or other stand by periods. '   a Steam drive. - Apply H.3. charges of l or 3 lb . . each to the flanges of the cylinder covers. This should damage the-. cylinder casting .   b Electric drive. . Place two charges of Ig lb. II. E. upon the motor armature or alterna tively a theMit -bomb v . . . .  If only a short'delay is .required ' the master controller may be. dttacked., SECTION V  9. 3. Ventilating Fans. If in motion place an H.S charge of the order of if or 3 lb. on the pedestal bearings of fans and driving motors or engines.  If at rest attack motors as described in Item 2 b .  Secondary Targets  1. Haulage Engines.  a Steam Drive. Apply an H.E charge of about if lb. to the flanges of steam cylinder heads.   b Electric Drive. - If in motion apply an H.E. charge . -of if or 3 lb. to pedestal bearings.  If at rest attack motors as described in Item.2 b .  2.Pumps. '  a Centrifugal. Place a charge of if IbV of H.E. upon an end cover below the gland. This should be sufficient for the largest pumps .   b Reciprocating. Place a charge of.if or 3 lb. H.E. on each crank shaft bearing. ' If only one can be attacked that adjacent to the flywheel or main gear wheel should be chosen.  3. Coal Cutting Machines. Place if lb H.E. charge on the driving motor.  4. Screening and Washing Plant. Attack circulating pumps driving motors gear boxes etc.. with small H.E. charges  WITHOUT EXPLOSIVES.  The normal methods of attacking machinery by the restriction of lubrication or the addition of abrasives will of course apply to all colliery machinery. The following minor opera tions are however of special application to collieries.   i Cut or short circuit the wires used for signalling on the underground haulage system., S3CTI0N V   ii Derail labs by spreading rails or inserting cbslruoilons into switoiies.  ill ' Bury under waste used as filling in  worked-out cuts .tools spare parts  and possibly pit props.   iv Attack surface stocks of pit props with incendiaries.  v Objects such as nuts bolts etc. may be introduced into'the gears of haulage .engines . etc. In view of. the relatively large amount of hand labour employed' in coal mines and the conditions of work underground this industry also provides a fruitful field for ca'canny  methods. Bor example ' the loading of a  proportion of waste material in each tub can have  a sensible .-effect upon production 'and if not  overdone is most difficult to detect., , FIG.4 -Pit-head gear., FIG.5 -Drum in course of manufacture, , , 1  33CTI0IT. VI..  1. nraj CTJON. Before the war France imported colcii\t coal and cohe in larce quantities and Belgium some coking coal. At present the enemv steel and iron industry is working at about 80f° of capacity owing to a shortage of furnace coke. Even this degree of activity lias been maintained only by importing high grade iron ores from Sweden and Spain which permit substantial economies in coke consumption when mixed with the lower grade ores of German Europe. Thus any reduction in supplies of either coke or imported high grade iron ore would cause steel production to fall.  The coke ovens in France which used to work partly on imported coking coal are not all being utilised fully and it might therefore appear that coke ovens are not in themselves a good target since the coal could be diverted to unused ovens. This would not however be a true picture of the position disused coke ovens fall rapidly into disrepair and the idle ovens are situated most inconveniently for use in connection with coal brought from the sources now' available by rail or canal and also in relation to the blast furnaces now in operation. In addition the pre-war labour force is usually no longer available highly skilled labour would be required for repairs i. cdueling bricklayers experienced in the extreme complexity of this work there is a possible shortage of. refractory-bricks and the provision of additional trains for the incoming coal and tne departing coke would add a heavy burden to the already overstrained railway system. Thus great difficulties have recently been encountered in starting up coke ovens in the Longwy. district of France to replace coke ovens damaged by bombing in the Ruhr. The coke oven capacity of Belgium which is situated close to the Belgian coking coal mines is already working fully.  The chief centres of coke production in the occupied countries are  1 94A °u.tgut Lo c at ion.  estimates  France 7.0 million tons Lens-Bethane area Czechoslovakia 5.2 Teschen Belgium 4.25 Mons-0har1eroi and Liege Holland 4.2 Limburg and Sluiskil Poland B.0 i Upper Bilesia Thus enemy steel production would be upset by the immobilisation of any coke ovens now in operation. Ovens of the latest typo produce more coke in fewer ovens with less labour and the location of these highly efficient ovens is known. Thus if selection is possible expert opinion should alvavs be consulted., SECTION VI.  2. Toluene used in the manufacture of T.il.T. and benzene used as motor fuel are obtained as by products from coke ovens by fractionation of the tar and by oil scrubbing of the gas.  Coke ovens are graded priority 1 for attack  2. COLE PRODUCT101 . Metallurgical coke is obtained from coal by heating out of contact with the air at about 1 000° C until the volatile constituents are driven off. It is a hard compact cellular structure consisting principally of carbon and the whole of the incom bustible mineral matter or ash originally present in the coal from which it is derived. It also contains a varying amount of water dependent on the method of quenching. The physical strength and combustibility of coke varies with the size of tho pores or cells a close-grained structure being stronger but more difficult to ignite and to maintain combustion.  Coke is one of the most important raw materials required for war industries being irreplaceable for the manufacture of pig iron from iron ore the carbide and electrode industries water gas for the Fischer-Tropsch hydrogenation process for the production of synthetic petrol and for a wide range of special furnace work.  Coke is also produced in gas works in fireclay horizontal and vertical retorts in which the coal is free to swell resulting in a product which is of loose friable texture igniting with comparative ease and capable of maintaining combustion in an open grate. It is not strong enough to support the weight of a blast furnace or cupola charge nor is it suitable for the heavy metallurgical industry. Gas works coke is however suitable for the Fischer-Tropsch process but this will be considered in another paper.  In modern practice metallurgical coke is produced either in Beehive Ovens or By-Product Recovery Ovens.  3. BIIIHI.'VIC C0K3 QVELS. Coke was originally made by blowing large masses of coal with a restricted amount of air in ovens of Beehive shape. The process is similar to the primitive methods of charcoal burning. The gases driven off from the coal burn throughout tho mass and provide the heat necessary for the carbonisation or distillation of the coal. All the valuable tar and by-products arc lost and only a small proportion of excess gas could be used for other purposes but it produces a very good quality metallurgical coke in large pieces.  The modern development of this oven is circular in plan 71 to 12 in diameter about 2 -' high with a hemispherical roof with a circular, SSCTIOil VI. 3. hole at the top. The-floor is built on the slope with refractory bricks and there is an a relied opening in the circular wall through which is with drawn. tho finished charge but which is stopped up with brickwork during coking. The Boehivo oven is rapidly passing out of use in this cquntry and on tho Continent but still finds favour in tho U.S.A. on account of the high quality product. It is not a suitable target for saootage. 4 BY-PHODUCT KJCOVSaV 0V3H3 . In those the crushed coal or slack is heated in narrow' rectangular ovens built in batteries of up to 150 units. Tie heating is indirect the gases being burned in heating flues in tho walls dividing the coking chambers and the heat being transmitted through the comparatively thin sides . Those ovens are made in a-great variety . of forms tho difference being in the arrangements of tho heating flues and the dimensions of the coking chambers The chambers have vertical or slightly inclined sides and arched roofs the main dimensions being about 30' long 17 to 20wide and 6T to 12 high the chambers arc closed at both ends with vertical sliding doors. The general arrangement of a modern type regenerative coke oven is shown in Tig. 1. The ovens vary in dimension according to the coal to be coked and depending upon whether the coking is to take place in a compressed or uncompressed condition. The gases from tho coding chambers are first led away and subjected to a systematic treatment in condensers etc. to remove tar ammonia and condensible hydrocarbons the incondcnsiblc gases or a portion thereof arc returned to the ovens through tho fuel gas main and burned in the heating flues situated between each ovon. 5 KdGUKSRATORS hlTD ITLI-kS Separate regenerator chambers are provided for each oven. They are built of refractory bricks laid chequer fashion and are situated below the coking ovens. Their construction is such as to allow the separate regulation of gas and air. In most modern plants the air for combustion is admitted to the base of alternate regenerators along both sides of tho battery through special cast iron air cud waste gas reversing valves. Those valves connect the base of each regenerator either to the waste gas flue or to atmosphere. For instance the air from the reversing valve 'F enters tho two regenerator solo flues G passes upward through the regenerator absorbing a high degree of preheat  say 1 0C0° C. and finally .niters tho bottom of the. heating flues through the ports 1H . Fig 1, 3sctioi 3ri  4. The gas from the hy-product plant via &as mains distribution pipes branch supply pipes is conducted bclou the regenerators into gas distributing ducts which arc situated below the ovens. The gas then enters the vortical flues through nozzles where it ignites with the hot air. The products of combustion pass through tho port at the top of each twin flue descending the downstream vertical flues into Ports 'J' thence to regenerators which recover tho heat in the gases into the flues 'K . The reversing valves at the outlet of the flues discharge the combustion-gas into tho chimney fluos 'L'. 6 HEVIi RSAL VALVES. Tho flow of air and waste gases in tho system is reversed by means of the valves F  Fig. 1 the gas supply being reversed at tho same time by tho codes TC' whereupon combustion takes place in the flues previously carrying the products of combustion and vice versa see Fig. 2 . To ensure tho necessary air temperature the gas and air flows are reversed every 20 to 25 minutes by moans of a chango-ovor machine-which may bo automatically operated. A modern automatic change over machine is illustrated by Fig. 3. Some older plants aro not provided with reversal valves the battery functioning by continuous flow-and arrangements-being made for the incoming air to be preheated by means of tho waste gases. 7 OPTHATIQLf OF OVEIio -G5H5R.X . Tho coke ovens and their regenerators aro of very intricate construction and an instal lation may take 12 to 18 months to construct. The initial starting up has to be undertaken with the greatest care and the increase of tho temperature has to be obtained at a very slow rate this operation talcing from. 6 to 12 weeks. Once the installation is working it should not be allowed to cool down as the silica bricks have a tendency to crack should thoy bo heated up again. 8 COAL SUPPLY. As a general rule the coal is washed and graded and then convoyed by a series of bolts mounted on a stool framework to largo concrote blending bunkers see Fig. 4 . The bunker is divided into a number of sections and its purpose is to blond correctly tho various qualities of coal so that tho coke produced ..ill moot the requirements of modern blast furnace practice. From tho blending bunkers the coal is carried by belt conveyors to tho gcrvicc Bunkor which is situated at ono end of tho battery of ovens see Fig. 5 . Alternatively where blending is unnecessary tho coal is taken to a storage bunker and thence to tho service bunker at tho ovens. 9. CKAPiGIHG. The coal is fod from the service bunker, FIG. 8 Steam Driven Ventilating Fan., FIG. 9 External view of air ducts., 0.3539 fxgohs 1., D.4028 Diagram showing operation of reversal valves, FIGURE 3.  Automatic change-over machine for operating reversal valves., 0.3931  FIGURE 4. General view of coal handling plant showing  Right -blending bunkers. Centre -coal conveyor. Left -service bunker., 3 34 iTO-UrffiS. Co e oven service bunker combined vith querchinpr tower, SXiTIOl VI.  5. i-.to a charging car which runs along the top of the ovens and is constructed with the samo number of hoppers as there arc charging holes in each ovon aoo Fig. 6 . './lion the car is in position over the ovon the coal is discharged. The oven is then scaled and carbonisation commences.  1C. piscitufinr.  T7hc i the coking period is finished the ovon doors rex and coko sides are lifted and the charge is pushed out by means of a ram. This comprises an iron casting shaped to the crosssection of the ovon and fixed to a long horizontal bar driven by a rack and pinion movement. The whole is mounted on a robust undercarriage which traverses the whole battery see Fig. 7 . The coko having boon pushed out of the ovens into the coko cars the latter arc-hauled to a quenching station of reinforced concrete. Here the-coko is submitted to jots of water or may be cooled by a dry process. The quenched coko is thon dumped from the cars on to an inclined cooling   wharf Fig. 8 and by means of hand-operated finger gates discharged to the coko conveyors 'see Fig. 9 . Sometimes the coke is quenched by spraying on tho open quenching bonch. 11. 00103 EAHDLim PLiJFT. The coke is convoyed along the full length of the wharf on the conveyor belt and can be delivered either direct to wagons or to screening plant comprising grizzlies and classifiers. Here the coke is classified into its various sizes for blast furnace domestic use etc.  12 BY-PRODUCT PLilfT.  The gases instead of burning at the point of origin as in the care of Beehive ovens pass by an uptake pipe in the roof into a watorsocjod hydraulic main and thence through a series 5a air and water cooled condensers and scrubbers.  'A typical installation is shown in Fig. 10.  The gas first enters a primary cooler or condenser whore the temperature is reduced and the heavy tarry products are condensed and -drawn off to settling tanks. From this operation tho gas is drawn off by the exhausters a typical installation is shown in Fig. 11. This plant consists of rotary gas pumps often turbo driven which are not only responsible for drawing the gas from the ovens but also for pushing it through the remainder of tho re coveru plant which is controlled by delicate electrical instruments genor lly to be found in the exhauster house see panel in Fig. 11 .  After going through th. exhausters tho gases now under pressure pass to the sulphato plant for absorption of the ammonia and its recovery as ammonium sulphate. The. aamoniacal liquors from the condensers and washers arc also, S2CTI0IT VX. 6. treated hero. Tlio gas not free from tar and ammonia is convoyed to the final cooling and scrubbing plant. Eero it is finally cooled by direct water sprays from about 50° C. to 20° C. before being scrubbed with oil for tho recovery of benzol. In some systems such as the Otto tho cooling and absorption of nq-hthalono are combined in one process. The final cooling process takes place in cooling towers about 14 diameter and 120s high tho number and size varying in accordance with the requirements of the particular plant. In tho initial tower ..hich is packed with banks of timber grids and freely sprayed with water from the top of tho tower tho naphthalene' vapours contained in the gas aro brought down to tho dewpoint of the oils. I.- the subsequent towers the grid packing of tho lower half whore the gas enters is irrigated with .partly benzolised pro-hoatod oil obtained from tho scrubber qirculating pumps. This absorbs tho naphthalene preventing it from depositing in solid form and it is subsequently recovered in the benzol plant. Tho gas then passes to the-benzol scrubbers  151 diameter by 130' high . The-absorbing oil  creosote or gas oil is pumped from tower to towor in the opposite direction to the flew of gas the oil being deposited in a reservoir in the. base of each tower. The levels arc regulated by float valvos and the henzolisod -oil is finally pumped to the benzol stills. I modern plants this installation is electrically driven and automaticgll-y controlled. The gas after these operations Is led to tho gas holder and distributed to tho various parts of the works any excess being sold to local undertakings 13 BEEZOL ETCOVERT PLANT. Benzol is distilled from tho bensolised oil from the scrubbers and each distilling unit. Tho Benzol recovery plant comprises a still operated by a steam pre-heater do-matering and condensing units and an oil cooler formed of galvanized pipes in a serpentine form with external water sprays P%. IS- . Tho naphthalene fraction from the distillation is led to largo covered shallow pans for crystallising out. This part of the plant is in modern practice protected by a system of fire foam apparatus. 14 BEhlChLEl Owing to tho tendency of modern plant to be mechanically controlled electrically and thermostatically tho number of men employed is small. The numbers vary according to the size of the plant and at night the numbers aro reduced to their absolute minimum. 15 VIT L P RT3 OF TEE PL-hIT.  a Exhausters. These rrc tho most vital part of the plant if they arc out of action the whole of the plant-must be shut dov.'U. Frequently only two aro installed one operating and one stand-by. They arc comparatively, 0.402S 0.3936  FIGURE 6. Coke oven charging car., 0.3935  Coke pushing machine, 0.4030 D.39S3  FIGURE 6. Coke side of ovens showing inclined cooling wharf., 0.3930  Coke Conveyor., 0.4031. 0.3932  FIGURE 10.  Benzol absorption towers and primary condensers on left.  Interior view of exhauster house, TJCTIOi VI 7. auall pieces of equipment and v/il.l require tvo to four iuoutlas for replacoaent.  b Tho Coal Convenor to the service coal buiii/feY Vt tlac elicl of the co e ovens particular if this i. of tho inclined belt type see IFi s. 4 and 5 . Time for repairs -six v/eebs or more. A conveyor to the washing plant or betuGen sections of tlie washing plant may sometimes bo of equal importance.  c l.ijmrtant ejquij.aoient of ja subsldia Z c'haraYb qr . Tue Coho Pusher. Jithout this the finds .ed prYluct could not bo discharged from tho ovens. Fir.. 7 . The Aiitoma tic. Chpixge-oyer Equipmerit  fbr the..G as and Mr Valves on the bVens . FijVT . These could be opero'ted manually at some considerable inconvenience but cnees.ive cooling may tohe place before it can be . organised. Tho By-Product plant. 'hif- & . As parts of this are vulnercblo to firo it may be considered a. a supplementary item to any attach on the exhausters. The loss of the use of the by-product plant alone would probably not immobilise tho coho ovens as arrangements could bo made to burn the gas raw. A good fire in the by-product plant might cause considerable cen sequentia1 dama e. Igoto If as a result of a or b the ovens are aliened to cool down the plant will be out of action for a much longer time than it takes to complete tho repairs to the uacliinery which has been damaged. Indeed in modern installations with hi.. h grade silica orichc it may be impossible to restart the ovens without almost entirely rebuilding -an operation which /ill taho a great many months. For this reason every endeavour will be made to prevent the ovens cooling down and cod in very or.coptional cases can this extra delay be counted upon. 16. .wio oc-j. ttiuit of yrf.. L if i t . The pp.lx P /c . .s . The coal bunker at tho o..d of the coke ovens '. ill almost always enable the position of the dvoiiS to bo asccrtc iued. There ' ill also be a tall chimney im./cdiut Ig behind th.o ovens., 33CUT01 VI. Exhausters. These v'ill be found i.u the first building of the by-product plant by follouinf the as nain from the 'ovens to the primary cooler a large piece of apparatus . There should be no difficulty in locating this building. It is possible that exhaust steam from the sif.iues driving the exhausters may bo escaping through a pipe passing through the roof although electric drive may be employed.  Cohe pusher.  This will be found at ghound lovol on tho opposite side of the battery to that on which cohe is being discharged. Coal C Oiivej 0 rG These arc tho conveyors leading into tho coho ovon coal bunkers. Driving goer is always at tho top of each inclino. Automatic Chpago-pvc r JJoar jfor thc Gas and Air ValVj sqn the Ovens. This will nearly always be found in the -control room which is usually located at or near ground level immediately below the service coal bunker. It must be at ono end of the bank of OVC. -E . .odizol plant. This can be recognised by the scrubbers. The large number of pumps that arc associated with this plant will be found in a building in close proximity to the scrubbers. Tho tanks are likely to bo at the end of tho plant remote from the exhauster house. 17. iIETTlOD j JjjI Ampi . without explosives. There arc not many oossioilitios ox sabotage without explosives in a cohe ovon plant. It is difficult to -go slow as so much of the plant is of an automatic or somi-automatic character but as in all works the cumulative effect of bad maintenance may load to an appreciable reduction in output. Other methods arc   a faulty operation of the ovons to cauec excessive temperatures in the heating flues or violent chan .cs in temperature. In silica eve i the brickwork is likely to collawso at a tempora.turc ox abouu 1 700 0. and ith somi-silica owiis over about 1 400° C. both those tcL.rn raturoe be in. about 100° 0. above the nor.icl hot spete.,  JJCxX VI. 9.  b  Pushins c. i oven v ith an adjacent one empty may clistort the brickwork.  c It may be possible to alter the cocl blcnclijie ratio anc'. thus alter the characteristics o the coke.  0. Common machinery such as will be found in the exhauster house conveyor drives coho pusher etc. may be attacked by tho usual methods of restrictin' lubrication abrasivos foreiyn bodies fire etc.  ./ith arplosivcs.  5p hausters.   a Place a charge of not more than 3 lb. of H.IO. on the casing of each machine preferably near the glano.. It is important that the exhausters themselves -arc destroyed rather then the driving Licici .incs Ci.g it may be -possible to replace tho latter by an electric motor and belt drive.   goal Conveyors.   b Apply cutting charges to the legs of one or more stool trestles supporting the coal conveyor-to the bunker at the end of the bank of coke ovens. It will seldom be necessary to use more than 6 ly lb. charges.  c Attack the drive of this conveyor by placing an H.2. charge of about Id lb. on the gearbox. Coko Pusiher.   d Ap ly 3 lb. 1-1.2. charge or ta-o ly lb. to the driving gear which operates the rum. Automatic Change-over Geemg where applicable .   e Apply two l5 lb. II. . charges so as to doatro ' gearing or large castings smash the electric clock. By-Product Plajit.   f Apply H.3. puncturing charges to benaol storage tanks and arrange for an incendiary to ignite tho escaping contents., 1. SECTION VII.  IRON AND STEEL.  1. INTRO3UCTION. Owing to the dislocation of the industryin France Belgium and Luxembourg in 1940 and more particularly to the subsequent shortage of metallurgical coke the steel industry of Europe is as a whole working at only about 80% of capacity. Capacity for producing the higher grades of steel is however being fully worked. Where alternative targets are available neither blast furnaces nor steelworks producing the ordinary grades of steel  Bessemer stee] known on the continent as Thomas steel and ordinary basic open hearth steel known on the continent as Siemens Martin steel should be given high priority for attack although open hearth steel is of more interest than Bessemer  Higher priority should .however be given to the following   a Electric Furnaces. Alloy steels are made for the most part in the electric furnace and capacity which represents under Q% of the total steel capacity available to the enemy is being used to the maximum. Such steels are essential for artillery and firearms of all sorts and throughout the whole range of armaments and engineering. Important electric steel manufacturers such as Ugine in Savoy are therefore graded 1 plus the highest priority for attack.   b Special Open Hearth Steels Many of the alloy steels can be manu factured satisfactorily by the acid and in special cases by the basic open hearth process and this capacity is regarded as likely to be fully employed on the production of high-grade steels.  The open hearth steel works able to produce alloy steel and other special steels are capable of producing about half the output of the electric furnaces. Plants of this type exist in. France.   c Transport of High Grade Iron 0rae The maintenance of the present steal production with the available supply of coke is made possible only by the import of high grade iron ores from Sweden Spain and Norway which by mixing with the low grade ores available from Germany and Lorraine enable the consumption of coke in blast furnaces to be kept down to a, SECTION VII  2. reasonable level. These imports are at the rate of something over 10 million tons yearlyout of a total consumption of 80 million tons. 10-20 of the Swedish and most of the Spanish and Norwegian ores are non-phosphoric and of high grade. The ores mined in France mainly Lorraine and its vicinity 33 million tons Germany and elsewhere are mostly low in iron content and high in phosphorus content. A 10 admixture of high grade non-phosphoric ore . in the furnace charge is necessary for refining purposes in the production of openhearth steel the output of which is about 25 000 000 tons per year.   d Forging. All forging shops are reported to be working very near to capacity.  2. IRON. Iron is used in industry generally in the foim of cast iron for producing castings or as wrought iron for forgings.  The production of cast iron is carried out in the foundry and according to the quality required. It is used for the manufacture of engine frames fly wheels cylinders pipes valves casings etc. Cast iron has a low tensile strength and owing to its crystalline structure is brittle and will easily fracture by a sudden impact.  Wrought irom has been almost universally supplanted by steel but owing to its purity is in demand for certain classes of work such as chains cables and sheet iron as it has a special resistance to atmospheric and aqueous corrosion. It is tough and has resistance to shock and is therefore very suitable for forging into shape without cracking or fracturing.  3. STEEL. Steel is a purified and special foim of iron and has superior physical properties such as high tensile strength. It is basically fabricated in the form of sheets plates rolled steel sections forgings and to a small extent as castings. In its general form it is known as mild steel which is used in every branch of engineering. By the addition of small quantities of other metals such as nickel chrome tungsten etc alloys of exceptional characteristics of strength and resistance to heat.or corrosion can be produced -e.g. stainless steel., SECTION VIZ.  3. 4. RAW MATERIALS. The basic raw materials required for the production of iron and steel are iron ore coal and limestone.  Iron ore is found in the United States Greqt Britain Russia Spain Luxembourg Sweden and India the U.S.A accounting for half the world-supply. The most widely distributed iron ore is known as Red Haematite and may contain up to about 70% of iron. 11 is also found as a Brown Haematite known as Limonite or as a carbonate and as a sulphide known as pyrites which is usually used for the manufacture of sulphuric acid. Commercial mixed ore as used at some of the big steel works may be of low grade containing only about 30% of iron.  The coal must be of a special kind suitable for the making of blast furnace coke.  5. LAYOUT OF WORKS. The processes through which these raw materials must pass in order to produce iron and steel are sat out briefly in the flow sheet which followsf  COAL IRON ORE LIMESTONE.  Washing & screening Mining plant Quarrying plant plant Crushing plant Crushilg plant  cOHe ovEEis COKE Sintering plant f   l BLAST FURNACE, SECTION VII. 4. MOLTEN' IRON  b r a PIG IRON F Cupola Cupola Cupola Mixer Converter Molten iron Molten iron Molten L steel Hon STEEL ggjTOg CASTING Steel MOLTEN STEEL casting \ Ingots I FORGING PLANTS I  ROLLING klLLS.j The mining and dressing of the raw materials are dealt with in Section IV of this Handbook. No reference is therefore made in this paper to any operations prior to the arrival of the raw materials at the works. Iron works are sometimes situated close to the source of the ore but morie often than not these situations are not economically soupd due to lack of labour coal and limestone. It is therefore more usual to transport the ore to places where such factors are favourable. ft  Eig. 1 shows a general view of a modern iron and steel works in this country i ThQ three blast furnaces in which the iron is made are shown on th 3 left of th-e picture the coke ovens in the centre portion and the converter house where the steel is being made at the right hand extremity elf the gas main in the foreground of the photograph. This main delivers gas to the boilers which supply steam to the turbo-blowers delivering air to the converters. 6. GENERAL. Iron is produced by smelting together iron ore coke and limestone in a tall conical vessel known as a Blast Furnace., W 32-V-i-b Coke Ovens Blast Furnace Bof/er Chimney Stock 'Yard Blowers f Chimney Boilers with Ore Bridge Boilers J Exhauster Converter House Blast Furnaces Cooling Towers Coke Conveyor Coal Conveyor Squat Chimneys / I \ /I /\ \ . Gas /Hain Fig.l -General arrangement of iron and steel works, SECTION VII  5. Old types of furnace oould deal only with ores of high iron content and low sulphur and phos phorus content but modern progress in metallurgy and constructional materials has permitted the use of lower grade ores with high phosphorus and sulphur content thus producing a cheaper pig iron.  The quantity of raw material-required by a good modern plant producing 500 tons of pig iron per day is approximately 1 000/1 500 tons of ore 500 tons of coke and 250 tons of limestone.  The blast furnace or furnaces form the principal apparatus of the whole installation but there are also a number of important accessorie's without which it cannot work. The production of the necessary coke is carried out in coke ovens often on the site of the iron works this Subject is dealt with separately in Section VI of this Handbook  7. STOCKYARDS AND HANDLING .PLMfT. The relatively large quantities-of raw materials required necessitate extensive stockyards and handling plant. So far as the coal is concerned this is likely to be stored in a separate yard whence it is lifted by conveyor to the bunkers for feeding to the coke ovens. The ore and limestone are usually stored in enormous heaps in different parts of the same yard which is situated close to the furnaces.  The principal feature of the stockyard is the ore bridge which is a large elevated travelling trans porter crane having cantilever extension on the blast furnace side see Fig 2 . This extension usually covers an elevated track on which run large rail cars of up to 50 tons capacity known as Transfer Cars see Fig 3 . Between the elevated track and the ore yard there is often a trough into which the incoming materials are dumped to be picked up by the travelling grab of the ore bridge for delivering to the stock piles. The ore bridge grab is also used for lifting the raw materials from the ore yard on to the transfer cars for conveyance to the blast furnace.  Arrangements for incoming materials will vary according to the means of transport concerned but if by sea there is likely to be a set of unloaders for lifting the ore from the ships holds to the transfer cars.  8. PRE-TREATMENT. It is necessary for the ore to undergo preliminary treatment before it is charged to the furnace. This comprises the following   a Screening and crushing followed by grading the finer particles being discarded., SECTION VII  6.  b Washing and grinding followed by raking against a current of water which washes out the finer particles.  c Sintering -clinkering the ore dust into lumps by firing with wet coal. 9. THE BLAST FURNACE. Fig. 4 shows diagrammatioally a typical arrangement of a blast furnace. This is a tall steel conical shell lined internally with high grade refractory bricks. It may broaden out internally one-third of the way up from the base but the detailed dimensions depend upon the characteristics of the ore with which the furnace will be charged.  An average height is 80/l00 ft. the whole furnace being supported on very substantial structural steel or cast iron columns. The total weight of a large furnace is about 1 700 tons with a charge of 400/500 tons in it.  The raw materials are delivered by the transfer cars into bunkers near the base of the furnace whence they are fed through hoppers into special scale cars weighed and discharged into a skip car which is hoisted electrically up an inclined plane to the top of the furnace and automatically tipped into a hopper or bell at the top. The skip hoist is provided with 2 cars one ascending loaded whilst the other descends empty. The winches are housed in a building nearby and are provided with limit switches to prevent overrunning. There is a larger bell below the outer bell and when it is fully loaded by a series ofdeliveries from the upper bell the top bell is closed and the lower opened discharging its load into the furnace. This new charge meets the hot gases ascending from the charges already in the process of smelting and moisture is driven off.  As the new charge slowly sinks the temperature increases and the carbon monoxide in the gases combines with the oxygen in the iroh ore to form carbon dioxide COg leaving metallic iron in a finely divided state. Such non-ferrous metals as may be present are mixed intimately with the reduced iron the limestone acting as a fluxing material. At the hearth portion of the furnace hot air from the blowers is forced under pressure through tuyeres into the furnace. The oxygen in this air meets the hot coke and intense combustion takes place. This in turn causes the metallic iron and non-ferrous metals to melt and the liquid mixture trickles down until it reaches the well formed at the bottom of the hearth where it slowly accumulates the non-ferrous impurities in a layer of, Fig.2 -Ore bridge stock yards and skip hoist.  Fig.3 -Transfer oar.  A338, 0 2858 5/ore for hmtity Air-bkut . Firmbridc and fhrtfiwn km, 15.617 D feofc vv5r5tt' Cfc  --General view of blast furnace installation.  Fig.6 -Hot blast stoves., SECTION VII 7. slag being on top. The iron and slag are tapped out through separata holes at suitable intervals. The time taken for a charge to pass through the fumaoe is 14/18 hours. A large quantity of. gas at high temperature becomes available from the furnace and this has to be economically recuperated as later described. Figs. 5 and 6 illustrate a blast furnace plant complete with stoves skip hoist boiler house and chimney. Fig. 7 shows a scale car.  Owing to the intense heat-generated on the hearth where the hot air under pressure of 10/15 lbs. per sq. in. is introduced through the tuyeres the latter have to be water-cooled. In large modern furnaces cooling of the brickwork is also necessary and for this purpose water is .pumped through copper ducts built in the brickwork. If the water was stopped for a very short while these copper du4ts would malt and cause furnace difficulties. See Fig. 5 . The molten metal from the furnace may be either run out into beds forming ingots or ''pigs' each weighing about 1 cwt. or may be taken in its molten state in large ladles direct to the steel works. FigT 8 shows a pig bed. . ' ---'. . -Y y 10. BLOWER HOUSE. 1i Blowers are required to force the air under pressure through the tuyeres to the furnace. These are situated in a separate house known as the Blower House and in close.proximity to the hot blast stoves. The blowers are generally of the turbo-type as shown in Fig. 9 Two or more will be installed and they are not usually associated with any one blast furnace but are common to all. They are almost invariably driven by steam turbines the.steam being obtained from boilers fired with surplus gas from the blast furnace. The boilers are in a separate house .adjacent to the blower house and can be recognised by their chimneys. The air is compressed to about 10/15 lbs. per sq. in. and delivered to the stoves to be heated. This installation beiqg common to all the blast furnaces is very important as without this air the furnace cannot operate. As blast furpaces generally operate for two or three years without shutting down there is always reserve blower power available by duplicate machines but no alternative supply 11. HOT BLAST STOVES OR REGENERATORS All blast furnaces are provided with Hot Blast Stoves which heat the air blast before it is delivered to the furnace. They correspond to the regenerators of a coke oven plant although they .are of entirely different shape, SECTION VII.  8. being tall cylindrical chambers with domed tops see Fig. 6 . Thay are typical of any blast furnace installation and each furnace will have two or three. A vertical flue passes up the interior which is filled with ''checker brickwork.  On entering the stove the furnace gas is mixed with air ignites and passes up the flue and down through the checker brickwork which it heats. After about 25 minutes the gas is diverted from this stove to another stove and instead air from the blowers is passed through the hot brickwork and becomes heated to 600° C -700° 0. As soon as the air has absorbed all the heat the gas is switched back to the first stove and air passed through the second stove which in the meantime has been heated up. This alternate heating and cooling goes on continuously to keep hot air available for the blast.  12.GAS CLEA.N1NG PLANT.  The gases coming from the furnace have entrained in them a large amount of dust and grit and in modern plants apparatus is installed to eliminate this dust in order that the gases can be more efficiently used. This apparatus occupies a large amount of space and comprises a dry centrifugal dust collector and washing plant and possibly an electro static dust collector to take away the last traces of dust. On leaving the cleaning plant the gas becomes available for heating the stoves or for firing boilers to produce steam for the turbo-blowers etc.  MANUFACTURE OF STEEL.  13. GENERAL. Steel contains similar constituents to iron but in different proportions the percentage of carbon being considerably reduced and impurities such as phosphorus and sulphur being eliminated. In its common form known as mild steel the carbon is reduced to 0.2 to 0.3 . A small percentage of manganese is generally added.  Steel can be classed as acid or basic according to the type of lining employed in the steel furnace and the class of pig iron available.  14. METHODS OF MANUFACTURE. Steel is obtained by refining molten pig iron which can be carried out in three types of furnace namely   a Converter or Bessemer.  b Open hearth or Siemens Martin.  c Electric., ,  SECTION VII  9. Ths lower gracLas . of steel are now made by Bessemer or Siemens Mg.rt.in process the-electric fumaoe being generally used only for fine grade steels and alloy steels where exact regulation of temperature is required. The Bessemer process has the advantage of being able to deal with low grades containing a high ..percentage of phosphorus especially when it is produced as basic-steel . 15. BESSEMER PROCESS. The principal component of 'a Bessemer steel plant is the converter. This is a steel pear-shaped vessel as shown in Figs.-10. and 11. It is lined with 'suitable refractory material siliceous ' in the case of acid steel and crushed dolomite and anhydrous tar for basic steel. The converter is. carried on substantial trunnions and a large size would be 20 ft. high and 10 ft. diameter holding about 25tons of molten metal. It is rotated on the trunnions in a vertical plane through an angle of about 200° by hydraulic ram and rack or by. electric motor and gearing ' If the steelworks are remote from the blast furnaces the pig iron has to be brought in ..by .-suitable c transport and first heated in cupolas as described later.under Foundries Cast Iron .-The molten metal is then poured into mixers in a large works or taken direct to the converters in ladles in small works. In a combined works the molten metal is brought direct from the blast furnace. . . . The mixers which et the same time act as storagV containers are large 'brickslined cylindrical'' steel vessels having capacities of. up to 1 GOO tons. As they receive a number of charges from the blast furnaces or cupolas -the..metal becomes well mixed 1 and of uniform grade before going to the converters. Mixers are' rotated on .'horizontal-.axis-for pouting 'ihtb. ladies for transferj to -the .converter .and the' metal' is kept hot by means of a gas burner at each.' end. . / ig ''12 .shoHs-rn cppapn type. of'mixer.''-1 ' ' .. .' / . r '.T e converter is rotated so that'its opening is nQ'ariy Ko'ri Qbtai.'and the mqlten iron is poured in limestone being first added as. afflux for the slag. It iS. thbn' rB.tjatQ.d'to the blowing or vertical'position and the molten metal flows over tuyeres or openings in the converted ba'ttom-through' which air is introduced' from    the'.jbidjyer iioiis'e at. a pressure of. .about-25 lbs per S . ih.h' thb-nir. being . turned an before rotation ' This air passing thrdhgh'.ftbb.-iaetql causes vigourous actionand a .stream of sparks-is .ejected whilst' a 'yellowishrod fiamo appears''at the mouth of .the converter for four or'five. mlnutes As oxidisation of the ifapurities due to the incoming air takes place the temperature of the metal'rises arid boiling takes place. . ' ', SECTION VII  10. During a further period of about 8 minutes the flame inoreasea in intensity changes to a bluish colour and eventually drops1 indicating that the reactions are practically complete. The length of the operation has to be controlled by the steel maker to within a few seconds and it is only by his experience and that of the skilled furhacemen that the exact moment at which the steel may be poured can be judged and it is on this judgement that the quality of the steel depends. The steel is then poured but at first it is only the slag that pours and careful observation by the steel-maker and furnaoemen indicates when the ladle can be changed so that the pure steel is run into its ladle and taken away and poured into moulds in which the steel cools as large ingots.  The air blast referred to above is produced by blowers similar to those described for the blfist furnace.  Tha hydraulic pumps which operate the ram rotating the converter will frequently be found in the basement of the blower house. They are similar in appearance to boiler feed pumps.  16. OPEN HEARTH OR SIEMENS. MARTIN. The process is similar to the Bessemer in as much as the steel is produced by oxidisation by air but the method of production is different as the charge is introduced cold and external heat has to be supplied.  The general design of the furnace is shown in section in Fig. 13. The walls are constructed of refractory bricks strengthened with steel stanchions and tiebars. Inside is built a shallow bath or hearth saucer-shaped in cross-section and carried on supporting steelwork. The charge is fed in by a charging machine in Small loads from time to time and consists of a mixture of pig Iron and scrap steel which is heated by the combustion of gas and air introdueed from regenerators situated under and at each end of the furnace each composed of two chambers filled with checker fire bricks through which air and gas pass on their way into the furnace. One chamber is known as the gas regenerator and the other as the air regenerator. The furnace and the regenerators having been heated up gas and air are passed through their respective regenerators at one side of the furnace and circulating amongst the hot brickwork become heated and finally meet in the hearth of the furnace and burn. The products of combustion then pass by ducts from the furnace indiscriminately through the gas and air regenerators at the other side and give up the greater part of their heat to the brickwork through which they circulate on their way to the stack. When these regenerators are sufficiently hot valves operate and pass the incoming air and gas through their respective, Fig.10 -Diagram of Bessemer converter.  Fig.11 -Bessemer converter blowing.  Pig. 12 -1 000-ton mixer., SECTION VII  11. chambers whilst the products of combustion pass out through ducts to the regenerators on the opposite side and in turn heat them. This reversal occurs about every twenty minutes.  When the charge has melted in about three to four hours iron ore is added the liquid quickly boils and reactions take place with the formation of carbon monoxide and the removal of nearly all the carbon.  The steelmaker satisfies himself by practical test when the metal is ready for tapping the whole operation taking about eight hours.  Ferro-manganese is added to the purified iron to complete the process of making the steel which is then tapped out into ladles taken away and poured into moulds to form ingots or the ferro manganese may actually be added during pouring.  Open hearth furnaces vary in size from 10 tons to 500 tons and may be fixed or tilting to facilitate tapping. The furnaces are kept in continuous operation until their linings require repairing.  Fig 14 shows the charging side and Fig 15 the tapping side in a group of 40-ton furnaces. Special attention is drawn to the charging machine in Fig 15 which is an essential accessory This machine picks up on a long arm a box which has been previously filled with raw material from the storage yard and travels to the appropriate furnace the doors are lifted the arm with the box enters and revolves tipping out the raw material and then withdraws. The furnaces are thus kept continually charged receiving continually make up loads so that the process is continuous and not in batches as in the Bessemer converter process.  Fig 16 shows a cross section of a typical open hearth plant. The large number of heavy cranes required should be noted.  17. GAS PRODUCERS A producer gas plant is required for the open hearth process if a supply of gas is not otherwise available. There are numerous designs similar in general principle but differing in construction. The ordinary producer is a firebrick-lined receptacle in which air and steam are drawn or forced through a bed of incandescent coal to produce the gas.  Fig 17 shows a gas plant comprising an overhead fuel bin from which coal is constantly supplied to a completely water-jacketted producer shell in which gasification takes place A maohanlo Hy operated revolving grate at the. bottom gives the initial heat, SSCTION VII.  12.'  for gasification.  18. ELECTRIC FURNACES. The utilisation of the eleotrio furnace has made great strides.in the last 25 years due to the fact that metallurgical science has introduced a new range of constructional materials to meet the exacting needs of modern engineering These materials whether of steel-or steel alloys have to attain a very high standard of excellence necessitating exact melting and heat treatment arid the electric furnace in which the temperature can be exactly controlled meets the above requirements in a way no other type of furnace can achieve. It is not used very much in the production of cast iron except where very high class material is required.  There are various types of electric furnace employing different principles of heating and operating but the Electric Arc Furnace is generally used for steal making They are not of great si se 25-30 tons being a large furnace.  The .furnace see Figs. 18 19 and 20 consists of a robust-external mild steel shell generally cylindrical in shape but sometimes octagonal or rectangular lined with refractory material such as dolomite or magnesite with a binding of tar. The roof of the furnace is designed for easy removal to. facilitate repairs to the lining.  An eleotrio arc furnace works'at comparatively low voltage varying according to design between 50 and 150 volts but it requires very heavy currents necessitating large cables and electrodes the latter may be up to 2 ft. diameter each furnace requiring three. The connection between the leads and the electrodes is nearly always water jacketted -The furnace is arranged to tip so that the metal can be conveniently discharged into a ladle this tipping being usually done by a special motor and controller  A certain amount of electrical apparatus is required for operating the furnace and this is installed in a separate house alongside the furnace this house would contain a three-phase step-down power transformer leads and bus-bars switch-board circuit breakers tilting motor and controller a separate D.C. current supply for mot ors operating electrodes etc.  The charge is usually scrap steel and cast iron pig iron not being used so as to liniit impurities and reduce current to a minimum. Unslaked lime and a small amount of iron ore or manganese ore are added with the charge to effect the necessary reactions during oxidisation. When these are complete after about two hours the oxidising slag is removed. This, rr  PO   Fig 14 -40-ton open hearth furnace charging side.  oJ  0  hearth furnace discharging side  A3, B 725.  IITKOftITZ OPEH HEARTH PLANT. Eng.Sept.19JO opp.p.574.  Four 200 ton tilting one 180 ton tilting one 150 ton tilting two 60 ton fixed furnaces. aete beet  used for steam generation. The tiltinp furnace illustrated is charged in the first place with molten metal then with scrap. Note the charging plant mounted on the hearth-high track.  Fig.16 -Layout of steel factory., Fig.17 -Gag producer.  B 0M  A341, , SECTION VII.  13. is a very important operation requiring much manipulative skill as should any slag remain phosphorus pick-up will occur which will spoil the steel. A certain amount of white sand is introduced during this process to coagulate any small particles of oxidising slag that may have become entrained in the metal.  After this sslaked lime mixed with fluorspar is added to form a covering Ig- to 2 thick and then carbon in the form of finely ground anthracite or electrode ends is added and de-oxidisation occurs ferro-silicon may be added to help in the process. Subsequently a sample spoon of the steel and slag is carefully ex ined and if the steel-maker is satisfied the molten metal is super-heated for a short while and then is ready for pouring.  The above is a brief and very general dsscription because the detailed operation of electric furnaces varies considerably according to the class of steel or steel alloy being made..  19c FOUNDRIES. .  A foundry does not usually form part of a factory making either iron or iron and steel but is found as a department of a general engineering works or a works making a specialised product. Foundries also frequently operate as an independent factory supplying castings to other factories  In an iron foundry pig iron is refined by melting it with scrap iron and coke in a fhrnace thus reducing the carbon in the pig iron from 35 -4% down to vfo or less and also reducing the percentage of . sulphur and phosphorus. The molten metal -resulting is known as cast iron and is poured in its molten state into sand moulds of the desired article. The iron cools in the form required the resultant piece being known as iron casting.  Foundry practice consists in the close control during melting of the percentage carbon that shall remain in the iron either in its free form and/or as a carbide. .On this combination or as it is technically termed ' graphitisation depends the ultimate crystalline structure of the oast iron.  Cast iron may vary from a coarse grey known as grey cast iron to a close grained almost white structure known as white cast iron.  Cast iron is brittle and easily fractures by sudden impact but white-cast iron can be rendered tough with a considerable increase of tensile strength by subjecting the castings for several days to a temperature of 900° 0. in an annealing furnace. The tougher metal is known as malleable cast ., SECTION VII  14. Cast iron is used for making steam cylinders for steam engines and'locomotives heavy frames for machines flywheels gear wheelsetc.  20. OPERATION OF CUPOLAS. A foundry has departments for sand preparing and mixing core making raw materials storage and weighing cupolas moulding and moulding machines . dressing and pickling tanks.  The furnace in which melting takes place is known as a cupo a and most foundries have two or more with capacities varying from less than a ton to 30/40 tons per hour The cupola is a tall tubular steel plats structure lined internally with firebrick from 15 diameter to 9 ft. diameter and 30 ft. to 40 ft. high tapering at the top end to an ordinary chimney to take away products of combustion.  The raw materials comprising pig iron coke and scrap iron are weighed out from their respective bins in the proportion required about 2 cwts. of coke to one ton of metal. They are then hoisted to the charging floor and discharged either manually or by charging crane into the cupola. Pig. 21 shows this operation.  The 'first charge is coke to form a thick layer at the hearth after which-pig iron scrap iron and cake are inserted in alternate.layers. The amount of scrap iron determines to a great extent the ultimate quality of the cast iron. A certain amount of limestone is also added for fluxing the impurities. An air blast is supplied through tuyeres generally from a small  motor turbo blower situated behind the cupola.  The molten metal is discharged at the bottom of the cupola through' a spout into ladles as shown in Pig. 22. The slag floats to the top of the molten metal and is drawn off through a separate spout.  The ladles are generally mounted on two wheels and taken to convenient distributing centres from which the metal is transferred into small pots and carried by the moulder ditect to his' moulds and immediately poured care being taken -during the pouring to see that the gas'e s have sufficient vents in the mould to let them escape.  21. MOULDING AND CASTING. Moulding is a most important part of foundry work and consists of leaving in sand the reverse impression of the casting known as a mould. Moulding can be carried out by two methods, iAi  Fig.21 -Foundry cupo.a charging ricor. Fig.22 -Cupola molten natal Use ..r i.  43, SECTION VII  15.  a Manual. Hand moulding is a highly skilled oraft and the moulder needs a long apprenticeship and years of experience. Except in small foundries it is used only where the piece to be made is very complicated or a limited number is required.  b Mechanical or machine. Machine moulding can be done when the casting is comparatively simple and can be moulded by one or two operations of a press.  a When hand moulding the moulder receives from the pattern shop the model or pattern generally in wood which is a full-size counterpart of the i casting required plus allowances for shrinking during cooling. The pattern which is suitably built in parts is then placed in cast iron boxes on the floor and sand is rammed around to form an impression. The internal shape of the casting is given by a core' also made of sand. Cores are made by separate operators frequently in a different bay or building from the general moulding and passed to the moulder who inserts them in his mould as he builds it up. The patterns are then withdrawn from their respective boxes and the boxes accurately put together by dowel pins through lugs cast on the outside of.the boxes. It is necessary to mould in two or more boxes so that the pattern can be easily withdrawn before the boxes are put together. Suitable pouring holes for the metal are made .in the mould and numbers of small vent holes for the escape of the gases.  b Machine or mechanical moulding Is generally done in hydraulic or pneumatic machines with metal patterns. The mixed sand is filled into the two halves of the boxes one supported in the top portion of the machine and one in the lower portion. The two portions are then brought together by pressure and the mould is formed the pattern is withdrawn and the moulds are ready for pouring. In some cases the pouring takes place on a continuous casting machine as shown in Fig. 3. Prepared sand is delivered by overhead conveyors .through chutes to the mechanical moulding machines which can be seen on the right hand side of Fig. 23. The'moulds are placed directly from the machine on a long endless conveyor which carries the moulds to the casting station where men whilst pouring the metal. travel with the machine. The casting continues its journey on the conveyor to the knock-out ppsition where it is tipped over end and frees itself from the sand -the latter being conveyed to the sand reclaiming plant. A reclaiming plant can recondition 240 tons of sandper day and each of the moulding machines.make 75 moulds per hour., SECTION VII  16. With the machine as described above moulding and casting is carried out continuously but hand moulding and individual machine moulding usually take place during the morning followed by casting in the afternoon.  The castings cool during the night and in the morning they are broken from the mould and sent to the dressing and pickling bays where adhering sand and oxides are removed to prevent damage to the cutting edge of tools when being machined in later operations.  The sand of which moulds are made requires to be specially prepared and different qualities afe mixed according to the size and quality of casting that is to be made.  For small' castings a general mixture is three parts of .green sand to one part of finely sifted coal but.where large castings are required a certain amount of straw or dung is added to the mixture in order to lighten the weight of the sand and so facilitate the escape of the gases.  Cores are made of coarse sand mixed with . ground graphite  22. STEEL FOUNDRY.-f a . Cast steel is not used to such a great extent as cast iron but is. a very necessary material where great strength is required and the article cannot be made economically in any other way owing to its shape. An example is valve bodies for high pressures and temperatures.  The method of making the moulds for steel castings is similar to that for cast iron but greater care has to be taken in venting the moulds and owing to the higher temperature of the metal a' different and better quality of sand is used.  The' furnace used is .similar t o a Bessemer converter in operation it is filled5 with molten iron from a cupola goes through the necessary reactions and as soon as t he blow is finished the metal should be taken away by ladle and poured into the moulci. The  malting of steel castings is highly skilled work.  In modern factories electric furnaces are used for melting and Fig. 24 shows an arrangement of two furnaces with moulds in boxes in the foreground ready for pouring., V .340 w Mi  Fig.23 -Continuous casting plant., Vol. 4AT III  FILE NUMBER SUBJECT HISTORY 31 PART III SOE GROUP B TRAINING SYLLABUS VOLUME SABOTAGE HANDBOOK continued FROM UNDATED TO, SECTION VII  17. 23 STEEL FORGINGS ' '  Steal destined for large forgings is made in large ingots oast to the approximate.size from which the forged article will be made. In -the case of smgll forgings standard billets are used from which pieces of appropriate size are out as required.  Machinery used varies from the small anvil and manual hammer of the blacksmith s shop to huge presses and hammers for dealing with such parts as gun barrels which in their finished state may weigh 100 t'ons and for which the billet may weigh 150 tons However in the ordinary engineering works forgings are made in a separata shop known as the Smithy and mechanically'operated hammers either driven by air or steam are nsed the hammers varying In weight from cwt to 5 tons.  -The steel piece to be forged is heated to a good red colour -in an oven gas or oil fired -the smith being a skilled man knows when it is hot enough and the piece is then hammered by heavy and light blows in the machine which is. controlled by the hammermen. In due course the piece acquires the desired form and is passed to other machines for boring milling drilling etc.  The steam or air consumption of the hammers is considerable and frequently separate boiler or compressor houses must be built'  The hammers and anvil are of heavy' construction generally cast steel The vertical columns are generally forged and the steam cylinder is of heavy cast iron  24. DROP FORGINGS.  .O ... ' A modern development of-the steam hammer has evolved machines which.stamp out by means 6f dies forgings which have to be made in large quantities s.uqh as motor oar or railway wagon parts. These are khoyh.as. .drop forgings i . f-.  Bars of metal are heated in oil fired furnaces or the equivalent-and transferred to the drop hammer which automatically delivers a. series of blows which stamp out in combination with the dies a . finished forging of the part required . Such machines can drop forge . from 50 to 300 pieces per hour '' accordirig to the -intricacy of the .forging., SECTION VII.  18. ACTION.  25. PRIORITY OF TARGETS. From the description of an iron and steel works already given it will be appreciated that it is a complicated factory extending over a considerable area of ground and comprising several individual factories grouped together for convenience of trans port of the several products which are dependent upon each other for the ultimate production of steel.  With such a wide field open it is necessary to consider which part of the combined plant should be attacked in order to produce the most widespread effect. Recommended action is however given against most sections of the plant. Action against the steelworks will hold up steel production but will not affect the output of iron which can be sent elsewhere for treatment at the expense of additional transport. On the other hand the immobilisation of the blast furnaces would not only stop the output of pig iron but the manufacture of steel as well particularly if the iron is taken direct from the blast furnace in a molten state for treatment by the Bessemer process.  With the exception of special alloy steels iron is therefore the best target in the works but there remains the problem of deciding by what means production can best be stopped. The alternatives appear to bet   la Direct action against the furnace itself.   b Elimination of the air blast.  c Interception of raw materials. Both  a and b would be effective but   c requires some discussion. Action against the coal handling plant or the coke ovens whilst of value in so far as the loss of the coke is concerned would not be decisive as other coke could be brought from elsewhere at the expense of transport. Similarly action against the ore bridge could probably be countered by delivering the incoming material direct instead of to stock assisted by a temporary belt conveyor from the stockyard and action against unloaders does not interfere with deliveries from stock. Neither of these targets would therefore be effective alone. All material can however be intercepted at the skip hoist which is the recommended point of attack.  In such a large plant correct recognition of the targets is essential a few notes have therefore been added to assist identification of the various works and parts thereof., SECTION VII.  19. 26. BLAST FURNACES.  a Personnel. The number of personnel employed is small considering the large area involved this will facilitate the detection of strangers. The furnacemen who are actually responsible for tapping the furnace are highly skilled and generally have been associated with the works for a long time. One or two skilled men will also be found in the blower house together with several belonging to the maintenance department the skip hoist and scale cars are continuously manned . The remaining labour.will be mostly of the unskilled type'.   b Vital Parts of the Plant.  i B themselves if a large scale raid is considered.  ii B the blast furnaces should be out of action for at least six months.  iii O About twomonths'would be required for replacement or repairs during which time the furnace could not operate.  iv P for the furnaces. Time for complete replacement four months repairs one to two months.  v S four months.  c Location. A The blast furnace pan be recognised as a tall structure with an inclined hoist situated adjacent to two or three tall steel cylinders with dome-shaped tops and Of slightly inferior height.  The blowers are likely to be in a building close to the blast furnace. The building will probably comprise two portions blower room.aM boiler'house Th'e latter portion will be surmounted by a number of small steel chimneys or one large brick chimney. Unless the site Is. on the banks of a river ' cooling towers will be In close proximity. If close reconndissance can be  made the exact position of the blowers can be determined by following the pipes' back from the furnace., SECTION VII.  20. Operating gear for the skip hoist will always ba found in the building immediately below or adjacent to the hoist.  The cooling water pumps will probably be found in the basement of the blower house or adjacent.  The scale oar runs on a track at the foot of the hoists and is in constant operation there may be one spare.   d Methods of attack. Without explosives.  As the operation of so much of the plant is automatic the possibility of reducing the output by going slow is Very limited. Faulty products caused by incorrect manipulation are likely to be readily traceable to individuals.   i If a piece of lead about the of a brick can be introduced with the raw materials in small or medium-sized furnaces this may eventually come into contact in a molten state with the brickwork and eat it away causing the steel casing to burn.  ii If the climatic conditions ice available a large lump may be inserted in the cars or hoppers ap above. This is likely to cause internal explosions.  iii Shut off a valve or otherwise interrupt the flow of the furnace cooling water.  iv Attack machinery of all kinds by standard methods such as lubrication insertion of foreign bodies etc. With Explosives.   v Attack with H.E. the columns supporting the blast furnace. These may be of structural steel or cast iron and will vary in number from five in modern furnaces up to about a dozen in some older plants. At least one half of the columns should be attacked if possible ordinary cutting charges of the order of 10/20 lb being used. The side remote from the skip hoist is the best. In the case of cast iron supports a charge may be placed on the side of each column as near half way up as possible., SSOTTON VII  21.  vi AttaoK. the blowers by placing H.E. charges at one of the following points Blower casing unless covered with planished ' steel .  Low pressure.end of  turbine casing.  Pedestal bearings.  The charges required are one  or more of l lb the number .  of charges depending.on the  size of machine but in general  two should be sufficient.   vii Apply an'H.E. charge to the' / main hoisting winch of the skip hoist and also if possible the control gear  viii Place g-lb. clams on the casings of all cooling water pumps. A less effective alternative is to attack special bends etc. in the pipeline which should have the effect of shutting down this vital service for a while.  ix Attack with small charges of H.E the electrical equipment of the scale oars. STEEL EURNAGES-  BESSEMER CONVERTER PLANT.   a Personnel. There is a relatively small number of highly skilled steel-makers and furnacemen assisted by a large number of semi-skilled workers for operating the cranes and handling the ingots moulds etc.   k Vital Parts of the Plant.  i B are not likely to be more than two or three the converter.will. be out of action for probably at least two months.  ii C vulnerable.  iii C handling the ladles., SECTION VII.  22.  iv Mstal Mixers. Destroy the tilting gear. If the means employed such as gas or oil burners to keep the metal hot can be destroyed so that repairs may take several days and at the same time the ladle cranes are put out of action the metal will solidify or alternatively it will be necessary to discharge it on to the floor which would be of great nuisance value. Of the above item i is by far the most  important.   c Location. The converter house can easily be recognised by the squat square chimneys arranged above each converter and if not protected for blackout by the pyrotechnic display from them. As a further indication reconnaissance would show from which building the ingots were being removed.  The blowers will probably be housed in a building immediately outside the main converter building and the remarks already made in reference to blast furnace blowers equally apply.  The converter operating gear will be adjacent to the converter.   d Methods of Attack. Without Explosives.   i The quality of the steel can be adversely affected only with the help of the steel-makers and furnacemen. Steel-makers are very highly skilled with many years of experience and a very few are available so that the quality of the product would be likely to suffer severely if it were possible to procure their absence  ii If the aid of the refractory brick layer who attends to the linings of the furnaces and mixers can be enlisted insufficient allowance for expansion when building the new linings will quickly cause damage to the mixer when it is loaded with the first charge of hot metal., SECTION VII.  23. With Explosives.   iii Attask the charges as described in paragraph 26 d vi for Blast Furnaces.  iv Attack the gear by fixing charges of H.E of the order of Ig-lb. to the gear box if electrically driven and to the hydraulic ram or toothed rack if the drive is hydraulic.  v Place small the control gear of the overhead travelling cranes Or if possible attack the main girders with cutting charges.   vi Attack the mixers as described in lv above or alternatively place a charge in way of the heating burners. sa OPEN HEARTH FURNACES .   a Personnel. The same conditions apply as described for Bessemer plant.   t Vital Parts of the Plant.   i Charging machine. could not operate with this out  of action.   ii Cranes. These are handling the ladles but it is a multiple target.  iii Furnace tilting gear applicable  iv Gas producer plant able.  o Location. An open hearth furnace house can usually be distinguished by a number of short steal chimneys arranged all in one line. The building may be a three-bay structure and a considerable amount of ventilation will be provided by means of ventilators on the roof., SECTION VII.  24.  1 Methods of Attack.  Without Explosives.   i The quality of affected only with the co-operation of the steel-makers and furnacemen as already described.  ii Cut off cooling charging dpops. With Explpsives. '   iii Attack the sharging'machine fixing Ig-lb. charges of H.3. to the gear box  it Attack cranes with E E. as already described in paragraph-27 d v .   v Attack tilting gear if tilting furnace with H.E. as already described in paragraph 27 d iv .  vi Attack gas producer plant by fcutting 50 .of supports. 29. ELECTRIC FURNACES.  a Personnel. As for other types of-steel furnaces- the personnel are highly skilled.   b Vital Parts of the Plant. .  i The step-down transformer  ii The operating gear for furnace.  iii The operating gear for  c Location. Unless observation of the buildings from which the ingots are removed can be made inside information will be required.   d Methods of Attack. V/ithout Explosives.   i The quality of the steel can be affected only with the co-operation of the steel-makers and furnacemen as already described. ii Mix a little water with the anhydrous tar forming one of the ingredients of the furnace lining when repairing. Trouble will be experienced as soon as the furnace becomes hot., SUCTION VII.  25. With Explosives.   iii A the surface of the transfomertahk about one'quarter of the way up it  iv A  ' with H.E. as previously described for the Bessemer converter.  v P operating gear of electrodes. . 30. GENERALLY. ' - Appreciable delays will often be caused  t by attacking special pipes in'gas and water mains with H.E -i.e. bends junctions etc. Similarly general sabotage against common .auxiliary machinery of all kinds will. have value if more important work cannot .be undertaken.  3 . EOUNDRIBS.  Without Explosives.   i P pattern shop and pattern store which will most likely be a separate building. This will immobilise the foundry for a considerable time unless it is a foundry working with metal patterns.  ii B be damaged in any way possible as the cupola cannot operate without blowers.  iii C  see paragraph S6 d i .  iv M water through vent holes into a large and important mould when it is waiting ready for pouring metal. Blow holes will form in casting and render it useless  v S foundry man altering the time of melting steel will render steel poor in qual ity. With Explosives.  A foundry is not a very good target for explosives. The best attack is to place requisite amount of explosive on pillars of cupola thus cutting out a section of the supporting structure., SECTION VII.  26. 32. STEEL FORCINGS. Without Explosives.   i Interfere with lubrication of blowers supplying gas and air to the heating ovens or if oil fired.ovens to the oil  pumps also to any driving motors.   ii Damage air or steam valves operating hammers. With Explosives.   ill Furnaces -attack blowers with H.E.   iv Hammers -pneumatic. Destroy compressor by placing Ig- lb. charge on cylinder head cover. Hammers. -hydraulic. Place H.E. charges on ram pumps or accumulators., 1. SECTION VIII. ALUMINA AND ALUMINIUM.  1. INTRODUCTION. Aluminium is a soft white metal extremely light ductile and malleable and capable of taking a very high polish.  Almost continuous expansion has taken place in the Axis aluminium industry. It is increasingly substituted for copper particularly in the con struction of H.T. transmission lines and in various electrical machines owing to it s high conductivity of heat and electricity. It is also well adapted to the manufacture of aeroplane parts something under 25 . of enemy aluminium production is consumed in the aircraft industry boats engines and  machines by reason of its lightness toughness and strength and it finds extensive application in chemical engineering the food and dairy industries.  Its subsidiary uses are various. Aluminium powder is widely employed in the manu facture of metallic paint as a protective coating against corrosion for iron and steel. As a de oxidising agent is is ued in the manufacture of steel and for increasing the fluidity of the molten iron in iron foundry practice. It is a valuable constituent of explosives of the ammonal class and in the alumino-thermic welding process as great heat is evolved during its combustion. Aluminium bronze and Duralumin have a wide range of engineering applications.  2. MANUFACTURING PROCESS. Aluminium is normally produced from the mineral bauxite an impure hydrated oxide. From this mineral is extracted alumina and by its electrolytic reduction at high temperature aluminium is obtained. The metal can also be recovered from the treatment of alunite and other aluminous minerals such as labradorite and aluminous clays but such methods supplement rathpr than supplant production from bauxite.  3. ECONOMIC FACTORS. Of the three distinct operations in the production of aluminium the intermediate stage at the alumina works is the bottleneck -All the enemy-controlled alumina plants are working 24 hours a day 7 days a week in so far as supplies of bauxite fuel lubricating oil etc. are not held up and anything more than a short interruption would cause a corresponding reduction in the enemy output of aluminium. Alumina works are therefore ' of first priority for attack.  In the aluminium reduction installations a considerable surplus capacity exists in Norway and France. Moreover the total army navy and air, SECTION VIII  2. force requirements do not exceed 35 of the total  Axis output. Thus a complete stoppage at  individual reduction works would not necessarily  reduce the total output of metal and it is  difficult to imagine any circumstances in which  military requirements would be adversely affented.  The largest reduction works in France produces  less than 5 and the largest reduction works in  Norway Haugvik Glomfjord less than 2 of the  total European output. Damage at aluminium  plants would however cause considerable dis  location -additional transport transfers of  labour etc. -and reduction works are graded  as second priority for attack. Certain  reduction works which produce electrodes in  addition to aluminium have been classified as of  first priority but this is on account of the  electrode production which is more highly  centralised -one plant often produces electrode  paste for a number of others as well as its own  requirements.  There is some evidence of shortage of bauxite at present in enemy Europe. Normally large stocks up to a year's supply are kept at the alumina works but air photographs of a leading German works have shown that such reserves there had been considerably reduced. Two releases have been made by Germany of French prisoners of war who had previously worked in the bauxite quarries and there have been various reports of shortage. Large scale interference with bauxite supplies would therefore under present conditions probably cause dislocation but small scale operations are unlikely to interrupt the production of aluminium. Hungary the most important producer may however be unexpectedly working out her high grade deposits leaving only a balance containing too much silicon and iron unsuitable for aluminium production.  Since additional intelligence on the European aluminium position as a whole is likely to be received from time to time it is particularly desirable to obtain the most up-todate information before considering operations.  MINING AND PREPARATION OF BAUXITE.  European bauxite-producing capacity is about 2 650 000 tons per annum at present of which up to 300 000 tons may be required for uses other than the aluminium industry.  It is a white brown or reddish-yellow mineral consisting of alumina with iron oxide silica etc. as impurities and extensive deposits occur in the U.S.A. British Guiana India Ireland France in the departments of Var Herault and Bouches du Rhone Italy Greece Hungary and Yugoslavia., SECTION VIII.  Mining methods vary considerably according to country and type of orey but in the main European mines are small with rather primitive equipment the mineral occurs in pockets or surface quarries where open working with hand labour supplemented by blasting is the rule though a vertical shaft with pit-head gear and winding engines may  occasionally be found. Power requirements are low and are taken from the local grid frequently by cable slung from small tree tops or generated at the mine. Mechanical excavators or shovels are not used except for loading from stock piles.  The explosive normally used is a modified dynamite with 60% nitrate of soda but black powder is also used in large quantities and stores would be available.  As a general rule a one-day shift of 8 hours is worked except for safety and pump men. No loading takes place at night.  5. TRANSPORTATION OF BAUXITE. ' Bauxite is transported to central dumps by Dscauville railway into chute and bunker bins. Transport from mine to railway...station or in some cases even direct to seaport is generally by lorry though an aerial ropeway may be used.  6. EXTRACTION 0E ALUMINA FROM BAUXITE. Apart from in Germany alumina is largely made near bauxite deposits -for example mainly in the Marseilles region in France. In Germany it is extracted at or near the aluminium works.'  European capacity for. producing alumina from bauxite is about 950 000 tons per annum. As slightly over 2 tons of bauxite are required for 1 ton of alumina supplies of the former cover capacity for the latter subject to adequate transport facilities.  There are several industrial processes for the production of alumina from bauxite the most important being the following in each of which calcining is necessary '   a The Deville Process. This involves the roasting of powdered crude bauxite with sodium carbonate to form sodium aluminate silica and iron oxide. The sodium aluminate is then extracted with water and converted into aluminium hydroxide   by treatment with carbon dioxide the sodium carbonate being 'regenerated at the same time. The aluminium hydroxide is then converted into aluminium oxide alumina by calcining. Fig 1 illustrates a calcining furnace Fig ' 2 shows the construction of the gifth gear wheal, SECTION VIII  4.  t The Bayer Process.  Thi s process produces sodium aluminate in the form of a liquor by treating coarsely crushed bauxite with hot caustic soda under a pressure of 5 atmospheres. By subsequent stirring with aluminium hydroxide the greater part of the aluminate is precipitated as aluminium hydroxide and the residual caustic aluminate liquor re circulates in the process to provide the bulk of the caustic soda required for the treatment of further bauxite. The aluminium hydroxide is than converted into alumina by calcining as above   c The Haglund Process. This-method is not in practice very successful and is little used. The impurities in the crude bauxite principally iron oxide and silica are reduced by the addition of carbon in an electric furnace in combination with pyrrhotite or some other heavy metallic sulphide. This results in the formation of some aluminium sulphide which rapidly absorbs aluminium oxide from the remaining crude bauxite giving a combined sulphide-oxide slag. The crushed slag when treated with water forms aluminium hydroxide and sulphuretted hydrogen. The latter is driven off and can be used if necessary for the pre-treatment of crude bauxite in order to reduce the iron content. The hydroxide can then be calcined to aluminium oxide in the ordinary way. Partly owing to the low melting temperature of the slag due to the presence of sulphides power consumption with the Haglund process is not high 2 kWh per lb. of alumina and the overall production cost is claimed to be lower than in the Bayer process. At the same time the capital cost of the plant should be lower.  7 THE BAYER PROCESS -DmiLS.  Of these processes the Bayer process which is a modification of an improvement on the Dsville process. is now most commonly used. The following are further details of its method  The bauxite having been transported from the mines to a central works is first crushed in gyratory or jaw crushers to pieces varying in size from 1 to 3 ring gauge with a large proportion of fines.  If necessary it is washed to remove clay and light impurities before calcining at 350/400° C. to remove organic materials. In some works the heating is only employed to remove free moisture and to enable the fine grinding 80/100 mesh which is necessary, Fig. 1 Rotary Calcining Kiln for Alumina showing girth gear at A.  Fig. 2 Typical hollow cast steel girth gear for calcining kiln.  A269, SECTION VIII.  5. for efficient extraction of the alumina to be effected. The material is then heated to about 170° C. under pressure with a solution of caustic soda in a digester or autoclave for about Ig-. hours. There may be some 30 digesters in a works of medium size.  The alumina is dissolved in the form of a sodium aluminate and the insoluble residue or red mud is removed by filter presses.  The solution is pumped to the precipitating tanks where a sniall charge of-aluminium hydrate from a previous cycle is added . This causes nearly the whole of the alumina to be precipitated in the hydrated form provided that certain critical temperatures and other conditions are maintained. The mixture must be agitated continually.  The precipitated hydrated alumina is filter-pressed washed and passed to the rotary kilns Figs. 1 and 2 to b-e calcined at a. temperature appreciably above 1 000° 0. The solution is concentrated and with the addition of caustic soda is used for the digestion of a fresh batch of bauxite.  EXTRIQTION OF ALUMINA FROM OLAtSt  Commercial processes for the extraction of alumina from clay have been developed though production has been on a relatively small scale as it seems dnlikeiy that supplies of bauxite will be insufficient to meet the demand.  The processes are acid as distinct from the alkaline processes used in the treatment of bauxite. Of these the Nuvalon system is of interest as it is applicable to labradorite found in Norway. Labradorite can be treated in local works- thus avoiding the transport of bauxite from other countries.  This process involves the action of nitric acid on roasted ore to produce aluminium nitrate. On treatment with steam the nitrate is decomposed into alumina and dilute nitric acid which is concentrated and passed back into the process .  PRODUCTION OF ALUMINIUM FROM ALUMINA.  Axis-European capacity for making aluminium is about 500 000 tons per annum which would call for roughly 1 000 000 tons of alumina. As at least 50 000.tons of alumina is diverted for use outside the aluminium ihdustry -over 10fo of alumina production is consumed direct by the abrasives and refractories industries for example -alumina supplies are therefore less than requirements., SECTION VIII.  6. Except in Germany aluminium plants are almost always situated in regions of cheap and plentiful electric power such as Norway or French Savoy in Germany with one large and two small exceptions they are near pit-head power stations.  Aluminium is produced by thermo electrolysis of the calcined alumina in a bath of molten cryolite.  The reduction and fusion of the metallic aluminium takes place in a special type of electric furnace consisting of carbon-lined steel casings. The lining acts as the cathode and there are a number of carbon anodes to each furnace. Figs. 3 and 4 illustrate the general arrangement of two types of these furnaces.  The temperature in the alumina-cryolite bath' ranges from 900° to 1 000° 0. and the power consumption is about 9 kWh per lb. of aluminium or approximately 20 000 kWh per metric ton. The consumption of carbon electrodes is also considerable amounting to about 0.6 lb per lb. of aluminium. The individual furnaces are not large and a plant- Of average size produces simultaneously from several hundred furnaces at the rats of about 1/3 ton of aluminium per furnace per 24 hours. A reserve of about 10% of the requisite number of furnaces is provided to replace those stopped for repairs or relining. The furnaces are usually coupled in series in batteries of 50 or 100 The voltage  used is from 4 to 7 volts per furnace with a current consumption of from 10 000 to 70 000 amps.  The crude aluminium is invariably remelted for purification alloying and casting-. For this purose electric induction furnaces with a capacity of J ton or more are normally used. The power requirements for remelting are low amounting to about 360 kWh per ton of metal although for the electrolytic production of pure aluminium 99.97% a further 20 000 kWh is required  10. KEY FACTORS IN THE REDUCTION PROCESS.  a Cryolite. This is a double fluoride of aluminium and sodium found in large quantities in natural deposits in Greenland only but is now produced on a large scale in Germany and France from fluorspar. Whilst there have recently been complaints regarding excessive silica content in German synthetic cryolite the supply appears to be just adequate for the present output of aluminium. The Germans are however making great efforts to obtain additional supplies of the low silica content acid spar and as this grade is of limited occurrence and in many cases is produced only as a result of special mineral dressing processes it is well worth attention. Deposits exist in France and Spain., CT'  ii  f. Electric -5 insulation Thermal -. insulation Carbon lining- Cc rV'..T 'plate Fig. 3 Side sectional elevation of electric aluminium reduction furnace.  A. molten alwmtniLum Fig. 4 l-nd sectional elevation of electric aluminium reduction furnace.  A270, SECTION VIII.  7.  b Electrodes. These constitute on important item of raw material as they are consumed at the rate of about 60% of the metal output. The requirement of carbon for the lining of the furnaces is also considerable for this purpose petroleum coke ground to powder and bonded with pitch is generally used but pitch coke low ash anthracite and furnace coke are substitutes. There appears to be no shortage of these materials.  Formerly the electrodes were pre fabricated from carbon paste in presses and baked hard. Modern practice is to use the Soderburg electrode which is made continuously above the furnace and fed automatically into the bath. A paste of ground carbon tar and pitch is fed through a hopper into a vertical tubular casing above the furnace and rammed down. Electrical connections carry the current into the casing and then into the electrode mass. The furnace bakes the lower portion hard and this then acts as the current conductor. In this way the electrode is constantly being built up at its upper extremity while the lower portion acts as the anode and is being consumed in the furnace. Fig. 5 shows a furnace with pre-fabricated electrodes Fig.6 a modern furnace fitted with Soderburg electrodes and Fig. 7 a general view of a furnace installation.   c Power Supply. Many aluminium plants generate their own thermal power or are associated with hydro-electric power schemes which are capable of generating large quantities of power at a cheap rate since current consumption is as considerable as 20 000 kWh per ton of metal produced in the reduction furnaces. In Germany however most plants draw part or all of their power requirements from the public supply system.  As it is more economical to generate and transmit A.C. and since the reduction furnaces invariably employ D.C. plant to convert A.C. to D.C. is a vital factor in aluminium works but large numbers of units are usually employed. The current is fed into the furnaces by an overhead system of busbars at very low voltage.  11. VULNERABLE POINTS.  a Mines. Bauxite mines themselves are not vulnerable but ...targets would include over head cable v/ays' mining plant mechanical, SECTION VIII  a. loaders etc. The power installations are small and simple and easily replaceable in normal times.   b Transport. Unless widespread sabotage would have inconsiderable effect transportation by aerial ropeway or lorry could be interrupted only very temporarily..   c Alumina Works. In an alumina works employing the Bayer process the vulnerable points are as follows   i The steam generating large quantities of process steam required for digesters.  ii The final calcining  iii The electric formers and driving gear for auxiliaries.  d Aluminium Works . Here the power supply is the major target for sabotage. Interruption of current for 12 hours will cause all furnaces to solidify and cathode carbon linings to crack with the consequent complete cessation of output except for reserve units. Molten aluminium coming into contact with the iron casing through cracks in the lining will be contaminated with iron and the product rendered useless. The clearing of a single frozen furnace is a serious  matter involving the partial rebuilding of the furnace and a considerable expenditure of  labour stoppage of 100 or more would be a disaster.  12. CONCLUSION. The primary target in the industry is undoubtedly alumina with the exception that aluminium works producing electrode paste.may be regarded as of equal priority. Aluminium works are vulnerable to attack through electric power supply but alumina very much less so   Whilst bauxite mines are relatively invulnerable they should not be neglected as there appears to be little or no.surplus production. The effort will however seldom be worth while unless carried out on a substantial .scale preferably against major installations situated close to alumina plants., Circular aluminium reduction furnace with ordinary electrodes. 14 000 amp  Rectangular aluminium furnace with Soderburg electrodes. 28 000 amps, , SECTION VIII.  9. ACTION.  Thsrs appears to bo little opportunity for sabotage without explosives apart from the usual action against common machinery with abrasives sledge hammer restriction of lubrication insertion of foreign bodies etc.   a Bauxite. Attack mining plant of all kinds overhead cable ways Dscauville locos motor transport mechanical loaders and standard gauge railways   b Alumina.  i A shut down the works for many months if destruction is complete .  ii A final rotary calcining furnaces motor gear box and girth gear.  This should create a substantial delay . See Fig. 4.  iii A destruction of gas plant where this method of heating is used.  iv A  v A  c Aluminium.  i C generators penstock pipe lines or main transformers.  ii A  iii A targets ., SECTION XI.   a WOOD PULP AND PAPER.  Wood Pulp.  1. INTRODUCTION. .Wood and wood products are known to te in short supply in Axis Europe mainly through lack of labour for felling and the large increase in timber requirements for fortifications A.R.P. reconstruction etc. The use of firewood to replace coal and other solid and liquid fuels and the increased requirements of wood pulp for rayon staple fibre and cattle fodders as well as to replace cotton for nitrocellulose have all tended to make demands increasingly difficult to fulfil.  Difficulties are further augmented by lack of transport facilities while imports from Scandinavia formerly very large have at times been hampered by raid damage to the Baltic ports.  Pulp mills are sited mainly near forested areas such as are found in Germany Norway Finland Austria and Czeoho-Slovakia. The relative importance of the  . various .countries to the enemy's supply position is as follows  1. Germany. 2. Sweden Norway Finland and Czecho-Slovakia. 3. ' producing countries such as France Italy except for pulp from arundo donax Belgium etc. As far as mechanical wood pulp is concerned Germany is comparatively well supplied and does not need to import it interference with machinery would not therefore be worth while though large fires would increase labour and supply difficulties. Of chemical wood pulp as produced by the sulphate process however Germany is a relatively small producer the demand for this is increasing for the manufacture of rayon and nitro cellulose as a textile substitute etc. and therefore sulphate mills and large stocks of pulp are of some importance as objectives.  2. GENEilAj-i Paper is derived from cellulose the quality of the paper depends to a considerable extent cn the raw materials used. The strongest and best papers are made from cotton and linen rags but 90% of paper made today is obtained from word pulp to the manufacture of which these notes will be confined., SECTION 11 a  2. Wood pulp can be transported in the form of dry sheets baled' together. As it is easier and less bulky than transporting the raw timber it is usual to make wood pulp in the country of origin of the wood  In the Scandinavian countries the logs of timber varying in length from a few feet to twenty feet are cut and hauled from the forests during the winter and floated down the rivers and lakes to the mills in summer. At the mills the logs are used direct for pulp' production but when the rivers freeze in the' winter and transport is held up a reserve stock has to -be -created for pulp production during the winter months-  3. PRODUCTION'.  Wood pulp is produced by1 one of two processes  A. Mechanical -grindingi B. Chemical -treating small pieces with chemical -reagents   whichever process is adopted the preliminary preparation of -the logs is the same.  On arrival at the mill the logs whether water borne or rail-borne are transported to a series of' circular saws arranged to cut them into 2 ft lengths.  Prom the sawsj the'logs are automatically transported in trough or similar conveyors to barking machines a general type of which consists of a revolving steel drum made of heavy channel section about 12 ft. in diameter and 15 ft. long. The logs enter the-drum at one -end and in tumbling about the bark is rubbed off they gradually work their way to the discharge end -the bark falling out through slots left between the channel sections. At this stage the logs are ready for treatment by' the mechanical process.  A. Mechanical Process. The woods used to make mechanical pulp -which is usually mixed with a small quantity of .chemical pulp to-prevent over-rapid deterioration  are spruce and balsam fir. Such a pulp is suitable for newsprint ' common printings and eheap wrappings mixed with re-pulped waste it is in wartime used in large quantities for shell cases ammunition boxes and as a substitute for timber and metal in many types of armaments. The logs from the barking machine's after the knots have been drilled out are transported to grinding machines were the wood is -ground into a coarse and irregular semi-pulp.  Two types of machine are employed the  pocket type as shown in-Fig. 1 or the vertical type as shown in Fig. 2. The principle of operation is the same in either type -i.e. by, J tt . 7 . Wood Logs I Sawing I  DC-BARKING Chemical Process  Mechanical Process -1-  Chipping Machine Grinding Machines I Digesters Sulphite Soda Sulphate  Acid AuKALl i . Recovery - plant Semi -Pulp . Screening 8 Bleaching I Pu LP Drying  Dewatering Pressing I CuTTI NG Conveying or Pumping Baling  - -1 Storage Export  I-1 Paper Mill Re-Pulping l BeATE RS I Refining  Screening Fourdrinier Machine, Fig. 1 -Pocket Type Log Grinder.  Fig. 2 -Vertical Type Log Grinder.   821, SECTION Ilia  3. means of hydraulic pressure the debarked logs are held against rapidly revolving grindstones. The grindstones are about 4 ft. in diameter by 4 ft. wide with a grooved face to help obtain the maximum de-fibreing effect.  Granite is the natural stone used but the majority of factories today use stones made from artificial compounds and a large number of spare stones are always kept in stock  A considerable amount of frictional heat is produced which is kept under constant control by water sprays as any undue increase in temperature will reduce the percentage of cellulose in the pulp.  The grinding mills are large and heavy machines driven by water turbines or synchronous motors today the latter are more often used. A medium size mill may have 10 grinders each  . grinder being driven by an electric motor of 1 000 to 1 200 H.P. In view of the large amount of power consumed pulp mills are generally located in the vicinity of cheap hydraulic power.  E. Chemical Process. The woods used may be birch yellow pine poplar etc.  The process consists of removing the resin ligneous matter and oils contained in the wood by boiling with either suitable acid or alkaline solutions which leave the wood cellulose fibre isolated the dissolved impurities being washed out preparatory to bleaching and drying or pumping to the paper factory. The dissolved impurities contain valuable chemicals which have to be recovered and used again.  Before chemical treatment can be applied the wood must be reduced to chips. The barked legs are split or fed directly to the chipper machines through an incline spout. This machine consists of a large revolving disc weighing about 3 tons and carrying several heavy knives set like the blade of a wood plane. The chips are reduced to small pieces of uniform size about f long.  Prom this machine the chips pass by travelling belts to large storage bins during which any resinous or.black pieces are hand picked off the belt by women.  Chemical wood pulp is produced by one of three .processes   i Sulphite wood cellulose producing a pulp suitable for printing or writing paper., SECTION XI a  B l oontc  It is used when bleached  for nitro-cellulose superfine  papers photographic etc.   ii Soda wood cellulose producing a pulp suitable for books and magazines and absorbent paper.  iii Sodium sulphate cellulose producing a very strong paper or kraft suitable for cement bags etc.  i Sulphite prooess. The chemical treatment consists of macerating the chips with a solution of sulphurous acid and calcium sulphite under pressure and heat. This causes the removal of the lignin and other undesirable substances but has practically no action on the cellulose.  The acid solution is prepared at the pulp works by burning sulphur and passing the resultant sulphur dioxide over wet limestone packed into a vertical tower. These towers are of small diameter 3 to 5 feet but of considerable height 100 to 135 feet and in modern construction generally built of concrete originally they were built of pitch pine which material can always be used in an emergency.  From the towers the solution is pumped to the digesters. The digesters are below the storage bins containing the wet chips and consist of large vertical cylindrical vessels with a domed top and conical bottom section made of steel plates iM to 1tm thick either in welded or riveted sections and lined internally with 8 to 1QM acidproof brick and cement. The diameter varies from 10 to 15 ft. and the height from 30 to 50 ft.  The digester is supported from the 'floor at a suitable height to make it accessible for operating the blow-off valve which is situated at the bottom of the conical portion of the bottom section of the digester. The supporting structure may be cast iron structural steel .or concrete columns in the newest mills.  Fig. 3 shows a diagrammatic view of a digester and Fig. 4 a series of digesters in the digester house with mild steel supporting structures.  The digester is filled with crushed chips from the overhead storage bins and the acid is pumped through a connection in the domed top. Steam is admitted at 70/100 lbs. pressure at the bottom of the conical portion of the digester. The chips are then subjected to a cooking process, DIAGRAMMATIC VIEW OFDIGESTER, Fig. 4 -Digesters.  Fig. 5 -Multiple Effect Evaporators.  Fig. 6 -Short Rotary Drier., S3CTIGIV XI a 5. for 9 to 10 hours after which the contents of the digester are discharged into a vat fitted with a perforated floor through which the liquor drains away leaving a brownish pulp.   ii Soda Process. Seda wood pulp commonly known as  . soda cellulose is made from soft woods such as poplar pine aspen. The method of production of.the pulp from the chips is  ' substantially the same as for the sulphite process except that instead of an acid solution a 7 to solution of caustic soda is pumped into the digester. As this process is alkaline and not acid the digesters are not lined with any acid-resisting material.   ii1 Sulphate Process.  The advantage of the sulphate over the sulphite process is that in.addition to fir and spruce pino.and waste from saw mills can be used. The process is similar to the soda process the main difference being that sodium sulphate as well as caustic soda is added in the digester.  4 . SGPLPNIMf. Pulp either produced from the grinders or left in the vats after discharge from the digesters is passed through a series of screens and washing tanks to eliminate irregular and coarse materials and foreign matter such as bits of brick from the digester lining or slithers of wood.  The screening machines consist of a series of iron or steel perforated plates either stationary or moving through which the pulp is pumped the screen being made of-brass wit sulphite pulp the plates and framework are made of bronze to resist corrosion by the acid liquor. Final screens have very small perforations of 1/16'' diameter or' slots 1/100 wide and special agitating gear is installed to prevent blockage of the holes by the fibre. Alternative types of screens may be of the centrifugal or rotary type.  5-KGCOVliPY PlAFT. An essential part of a chemical pulp mill producing soda or sulphate .pulp is the recovery plant in which a large percentage of the chemicals added to the chips in the digester are recovered and used again. The liquor known as black liquor drained from the mass which is discharged from the digesters contains besides refuse materials caustic soda. The caustic soda used in the soda process and the sodium sulphate used an the sulphate process are recovered in this nlant for re-use, The black liquor is first passed through multiple effect evaporators Fig 5 to concentrate the liquid to about 5cf moisture. From the evaporators it is delivered to one end of a rotary furnace where it is burned. There may be several furnaces each comprising a horizontal steel cylinder 15 to 30 ft. long 8 to 10 ft. in diameter lined with 12 to 24 of firebrick revolving at 1 r.p.m. and driven by electric motor through gearing Fig. 6 .  Hot gases are admitted to the furnace from an external source 'which coming into contact with the liquor evaporates the residual moisture leaving a mass of carbon and inorganic chemicals known as black ash .  In the soda process the black ash from the rotary furnace passes through a series of dissolving ana causticising tanks and by chemical reaction caustic soda is eventually obtained for re-use in the digesters.  In the sulphate process the black ash has to pass to a second stationary brick furnace where by the addition of high pressure air it is smelted. Chemical action takes place and the smelt is delivered as a white hot liquid into the dissolving tanks. From these tanks it is then passed to the causticising plant and eventually the sodium sulphate is recovered for return to the digesters.  6. DRYING. If the paper mill using the stock is sufficiently close to the pulp mill to allow the stock to be moved economically by means of piping or special conveyors it is thickened by going through a process known as deokering or de-watering in which a certain amount of water is drained out leaving the fibres in a suitable condition to be conveyed or pumped to the paper machine.  If however the pulp is required for export or for storage purposes it is necessary to extract the water sufficiently to convert the fibres into sheets dry enough to hold together and enable them to be folded or wrapped into bundles. This is done on a machine known as a wet press and gives about 60 air dry fibre.  In many cases for long distance trans portation however it is necessary to dry the pulp further and this is done on a machine similar to the Fourdrinier machine described in the Papermaking section and produces a dry pulp suitable' for winding into rills and cutting into small sheets for easy transport.  A considerable amount of other machinery is found in a pulp mill which is required for accessory processes such as recovering cellulose out of rejected material from the fine screens also suitable apparatus for introducing bleach liquors such as chlorine during screening., SECTION njal  7  The final operation for pulp which is to be exported before it is baled is to pass it through rolls which disfigure and perforate it the object being to distinguish it fr a manufactured paper as it is admitted to most countries at a lower tariff.  PQwSR 3UPFLY  Wood pulp factories in Europe arrange to a large extent their power supply according to the type of pulp being manufactured.  If producing mechanical pulp a considerable amount of electric power is required and as many factories are situated where plenty of hydro-electric power is available they construct their own power stations and also supply power to the surrounding neighbourhood  If chemical pulp either soda or sulphate is being manufactured the black liquor from the chemical recovery plant is burnt under boilers producing all steam that is required for process work and in the more modern factories producing as well enough steam for all power necessities of the factory.  Alternatively if sulphite pulp only is produced the b2.ack liquor cannot be used again and ordinary water tube toilers coal or wood fired are used to produce the necessary process steam only or in conjunction with pass-out turbines provide electric power and the low pressure steam required.  Sometimes where a hydro-electric station exists there is surplus power and electric boilers ere installed to provide process steam.  In some factories due to the type of machinery installed motor generator sets of the ordinary type are installed to provide D.C current see Electric Power Handbook for description .  8 TQLjME oAikuE PpIPTS Jjp ACT ION  i I one i-. Attack hydro-electric station in approved manner.  Attack motor generators and transformers with H.E. charges by the approved method.  Destroy steam supply by attacking boilers or pass-out turbines   ii Pinter Reserve of Logs. Incendiary action.   iii L'Ie ohsnicai Pulp Plant. Owing to the large number robust type of machines and heavy charges required this, SlilCTIOK -I a  8. Mechanical Pulp PIant cont.  portion of the plant is net oonsilered. suitable for attack by small parties.   iv Chemical Pulp Plant.  8 Sulphur Stocks Required for Producing Sulphur Incendiary action. This will only result in loss of sulphur and delay until fresh supplies can be obtained.   b Digesters 1 For Sulphite. Plant.  Cut supporting columns. There will generally be four columns to each digester. Two columns on the same side should be cut.  Per Sulphate Plant.  As above and in addition apply medium H. . charges to plates of the concrete bottom near riveted seams.   v Fourdrinier Machine. For treatment see Paper Manufacture section., SECTION II a  9. Paper Manufacture.  9. INTRODUGTIGK Most paper mills are capable of the manu facture of any of the commoner grades of paper and many if they have board machines also make boards. Some mills however specialise in thin papers or technical grades such as photographic papers cigarette papers condenser tissues electrical insulating papers and boards ferroprussiate or ferrogallic and dylline papers telegraphic and morse tapes monotype tapes etc. These special mills are of some importance as objectives.  Of factories manufacturing articles from paper and sometimes attached to a paper mill producing kraft paper those making the following should be mentioned  Paper sacks Bitumenisod paper and board highly  inflammable . Shell and other ammunition cases. Corrugated cardboard which burns easily .  10. GjIIjRAI Paper is a sheet of felted cellulose fibres obtained from disintegrated wood pulp rags and waste paper. The following notes deal with the machinery relating to paper made from wood pulp and waste paper. Tb e proportion of paper made from rags is not of special importance.  The pulp either in its dry or liquid form consists of irregular fibres and further treatment is required to reduce them to uniform size and impart strength and cohesion before they pass to .the actual paper-making machine known as the nPourdrinier '.  H. MnMJEAOTUKE. The pulp boards are first fed into breaking or re-pulping machines after which the pulp passes through a beater machine where the fibres in suspension are reduced to the necessary fineness. In the case of chemical pulp a little bleaching liquor is added and the mass goes to tanks to drain and allow the bleach to expend itself.  There are many types of beater or hcllander but generally the construction consists of a heavy roll equipped with a number of sharp-edged bars and knives parallel to its axis. Beneath this roll is a curved plate also fitted with knives set at a slight angle from those on the roll. The action is described as that of cutting cruising fraying brooming and splitting of the fibres fco give them the best form for felting into a sheet. Fig. 4 shows a beater room., ACTION in a  10. I roLn the beater the pulp passes to a Gordon engine where it receives a refining dressing into fibres or a .orbcr loii th 'Inc uicj.Cij.iA.i.e Ounoiots of a conical shell in which an inner cone revolves both fitted with knives. from this engine it is passed through diaphragm and rotary screens to clean it further before being pumped to the head box of the paper-making machine.  The Paper-Making Machine.  The paper-making machine carries out the operation of draining the suspension of fibres of water on a wire gauze screen and pressing and drying the resulting felted agglomeration. The machine on which most paper is made is called a fourdrinier and is a standard arrangement in most countries variations being chiefly in the wet or feeding end. It consists essentially of four parts   i T  ii D section.  iii D  iv G  See Pig. 1 .   i A long vibrating tray the bottom of which is formed 'by an endless travelling wire gauze belt receives the -wet pulp at the wet end of the machine' from a head box fitted with baffle plates and which allows the suspension to overflow on to the wire belt at a definite rate. Beneath the upper surface of the belt there is a series of small diameter brass-coated steel tubes revolving by frictional contact with the belt and withdrawing water by capillary action from the suspension which has now begun to form a felt. A further series of vacuum boxes reduce .the excess of water from the felt and the whole is given a slight .lateral vibration to assist the orientation of the fibres forming the felt. Before leaving the belt the felt which is now of matlike formation and initial paper is passed under a roll of screen wire called a dandy roll which presses lightly on the wet paper serving to smooth it and also impart any watermark required.  ii The wet paper supported on a woollen felt belt then passes through a series of rollers which squeeze out and partly dry the paper. The upper rolls are of wet or polished stone and the lower ones of rubber-covered iron. At this stage the paper contains about 65°g of water., i  T T fCr iJr-r r nri nr rT T  'ouch Rolls 2nd I t U idth. no inrhcs. length froni Hrra t to Rwl 171 fort. I oral itn ih. 331 frtt front Back of Stuff Cfi t to Rc l.  Fig. 1 -General Arrangement of Fourdrinier Mtcnine, , , SECTIOlv XI a  11.  iii The paper next passes on to steamheated drum rolls usually about 4' in diameter and in some larme machines there may be as many as 40 rolls. A canvas belt helps to carry the paper round the rolls and njockey rollers help to maintain the contact round the greater part of the circumference of each roll before the sheet passes to the next. The canvas belt is continuous and passes over a separate series of drying rolls before again picking up the wet paper from the press rolls.  iv This portion of the machine comprises heavy finishing or calender rolls which impart a high gloss .to the paper alternate rolls being made of compressed fibre or steel which become hot by friction the heat adding the polishing effect. Most of these machines operate at speeds of about 60u ft. per minute but newsprint runs as fast as 1500 ft. per minute. From the Fourdrinier machine the paper is wound on to reels or cut into sheets and stacked depending on the ultimate require ments or destinations. Figs. 2 and 3 . The modern drive of these very large machines which may be 250 ft. in length is by a series of variable speed electric motors through helical gears each sectionalised part of the machine having its own set of motors but all suitably interconnected for maintaining the relative desired speeds of the several sections. Fig. 5 shows a set of motors.  12 yULKERlBLll F011413 Ax-D ACTION.   i .Power. As for Pulp. Special attention should be paid to any large D.C. motor generators.   ii Fourdrinicr Machine.  a Attack the vertical frame of the calender portion of the machine with H.S. charges. Gut the frame as near to the base as possible. Probably delay -2 to 3 months.  b Large drum bearings at both ends should be attacked with H.E. to cause the drum to fell out of position., SECTION XI.  1   b EL AX  1. INTRODUCTION. Flax from occupied countries is one of the most important gains in textile fibre secured by the Axis. The original pre-war stocks and captured loot of cotton wool and jute have dwindled to non existence and flax together with rayon and staple fibre has now to provide the main substitute for these materials in the manufacture of -   Army web equipment Aircraft clcth Firehose Tents Tarpaulins Rope thread etc.  Since the occupation of large areas of Russia the Axis has access to flax supplies of almost equal quantity to her pre-war imports of cotton. However as the Russian de-fibreing or scutching plants have to a large degree been destroyed most of the scutching would have to be undertaken in the Baltic States Poland and Belgium which are the other large centralised areas in Axis territory. Whether this can be effected or not depends upon the availability of transport as the flax in a pre-scutohed state is very bulky.  2. GENERAL DETAILS Treatment of the flax in factories in  Belgium preparatory bo going to the spinning mills is mostly to be found on the banks of the River Lys between Armentieres and Deynze Courtrai being the centre. These factories are easily recognisable as they stand amongst flat fields required for spreading and grassing. The buildings for the most part are old and are in the shape of-three sides of a square all having a tall chimney and are surrounded by storenouses and barns where the dried flax is stored They are often isolated to prevent the risk of fire and situated in outlying districts not heavily guarded.  The residue-of flax straw after the retting process known as shive has by German decree to be compulsorily used as a source of cellulose for wool type staple fibre.  3. THE FLAX PLANT. Flax grown for fibre purposes attains a height of from 3 to 4 ft. The stems are slender and clean and branch out only at the top where.the flowers blue or white are borne. The fibre is of the nature of a blast fibre and is found between the cortex or bark and the wood of the stem., SECTION XI 1o  2. The flowers are gathered and the seed pods produce linseed oil.  4. HARVESTING AND PPEPABATION NOR SPINNING-a The customary period for flax sowing is Marcb-April and for harvesting from.June to August. Before it is ready for the spinning mills-it has -to pass through the following processes   a Pulling  b Rippling  c .  d Squeezing or pressing . e Drying . f Breaking   g Scutching.  a PuJ.l-ing. Nhlike ost other crops flax Is' harvested by pulling .' so that both roots and .stem are garnered . In modern ..continental practice this is done by a specially designed type of light weight tractor. . The crop is then dried by spreading on the ground .followed by stacking it in the form of sheaves or wigwamsn' drying is important as storage ih.the wet stage leads to premature bacterial at'tack' and damage to the fibre. The bundles are then packed loosely in ricks freely ventilated.   b Rippling. By this process the bolls or seed pods are removed and carefully retained.for the extraction of the oil.in.them. This operation may take place immediately after the pulling or alternatively as in the Ccurtrai method the crop is d.ried and' stacked and only boiled in the early part of the next season.  Essentially the process consists of drawing bundles of flax through a coarse comb.to remove seed capsules it is a highly skilled job since mechanical injury or rupture of the stalks at this stage causes difficulties in later processing resulting in an inferior fibre. De-seeding in the smaller farms is performed by hand but on larger farms by machines which are mostly made of wood and driven by small electric motors.   See Figs. 1 & 2.  The seedless plant is then stored 'frequently for some months either by the farmer or the retting factory if rippling has taken place immediately after pulling i'k t161 b0 noted  therefore -that for a relatively long period say September to March there are large stocks of very dry fibre in stacks barns or warehouses., FLAX IN THE FIELD f DE-SEEDING RETTING I'L 1 DEW PONDS TANKS SCUTCHING FACTORY SPINNING MILL HACKLING MACHINES TOW  BEST LONG FIBRE  CARDS  LINE FIBRE AUTOMATIC SPREADER DRAWING FRAMES A' ROVING FRAMES . WET AND DRY SPINNING, , SECTION XKb  3.  c Rettlns. Preparatory to retting the flax is carefully sorted according to length thickness colour quality and soundness since all these factors affect the rate of retting and it is the aim to group together material which requires approximately the same retting period if maximum uniformity is to he achieved. Irregular sorting may cause considerable difficulty in retting and later processes resulting in weaker and shorter fibres which in turn adversely affect the strength and quality of the ultimate yarn and fabric and is therefore regarded as the keystone of quality.  The sorted flax is made up into bundles unless it is to be dew retted see below and for maximum quality it is again important that the bundles be evenly made to secure even retting throughout.  The two common methods employed are dew retting and water retting. In either case the process is to cause the separation of the fibres from the surrounding outer covering and woody material of the stalks by decomposition and fermentation and it is of critical importance in the preparation of the fibre.  Retting may be carried out by the farmer but in the main it is done at retting factories. The farmer may adopt either dew retting or retting in pits ponds or tanks and occasionally rivers whereas the retting factories normally use the tank or river systems.  A. Dew Retting. This is performed in the early part of the year March and April and towards the end of the year at the beginning of November . In Belgium this type of retting is used occasionally for inferior quality flax and conditions allow it to be carried out from January 15th to the end of October.  The flax straw is spread evenly and thinly over closely cropped damp grass fields and subjected to the action of dew rain and moisture during the retting process the flax is turned with a long pole. Retting takes about 1-3 weeks depending upon the weather in moist warm weather the action is more rapid 7 -10 days whilst in cooler weather it may take a month. If continued wet weather prevents the straw from being lifted it becomes over-retted and of little value., SECTION XI b  4  The process has except in Russia and to some extent in Belgium been supplanted by water.retting wherever conditions permit.  B. Hater Retting. Water retting may be done   1 Naturally in ponds or streams. Ui . Artificially in tanks.   i The ponds are generally made on the land in close proximity to a river or streams and filled with water which should be soft they are generally constructed about 4 ft. deep. The stalks' or flax straw are placed in ponds roots downwards and kept floating in suspension B/S'1 below the surface. This is done by covering them over by planks which are weighted down by heavy stones. The time taken to separate the .fibre varies from eight' to twelve days according to suitability and. temperature of the water the operation generally being carried out in the period April- October. Retting in sluggish rivers or streams gives a be'ctor coloured and. finer flax and whlls t it is submerged in a similar mann-jr ots-for piond retting the proses is quicker' taking only about six to uine days.  Two' special 'processes employed in Belgium are the I ys retting and jiahders Blue revfcing processes. In the former whifh prodices a high  quality flax the carefully sorted jid  'prepared flax Is bound in'bundles coot and tip alternately being placed' together and packed upright ih retting crates 5 x if m. lined with jute cl th. The flax is.covered with straw and the crates'immersed in the .River Lys f rst weighted with stones so that 20-25 dm. of the crate is abo the surface and then as-the straw ehsorbs water and aif is displaced totally submerged. The crates each of which holds aboijt 1500-1800 kgs. raw flax  are moored to the side of the river in long rows. When retting is complete and the' flax has dried the process is repeated the tips and roots which were at the top of the water in'the first retting now being reversed in position. The first retting may take from it to 10 days the second from 4is to 11 days., SECTION XI b  5. In the Flanders Blue retting process pit retting follovred bydew retting is employed the mud with which the flax is covered gives the scutched flax a bluish colour.  Figs. 3 and 4 show crates of flax moored to a river bank in Belgium.   iiArtificial Retting.  This method has been adopted to a very large extent in the last few years as it reduces the time element to 3 to 3 days and can be carried out throughout the year ' A design used in Belgium comprises three concrete or reinforced concrete tanks with a total capacity of 12 tons of flax straw. Warm water is supplied from the reserve tank connected to the boiler the temperature being maintained uniformly at 95° F. 35° C. and the flax carefully sorted and not tdo tightly bundled is placed upright in the tanks-until the retting action is complete.   d Squeealng-or Pressing. In order to obtain a better yield of long fibre the retted flax should be well rinsed with water and squeezed through a mangle or eliminating press to remove rinsing liquid and residual retting liquor.   e grying. This process is either natural when the flax is stacked in wigwams of about 50 cms. base diameter in the fields or artificial when it is dried in special lofts or drying rooms by a circulating current of hot air  55°-550 C. maximum temperature . By this latter method the moisture content is reduced to about 15f° -a flax containing 3507° moisture requires about 2 hours drying.  In Belgium some of the newer drying factories would appear to have been constructed as strong points - see Fig. 5 .   f Breaking. This process designed to remove the bundles of flax fibre from the woody flax stem is in general carried out by passing the flax through fluted rollers see Fig. 6 from which it emerges as a wide ribbon lending itself readily to inspection and further sorting. in the case of dew retting however it is carried out by hand in spe.oial wood contraptions, SECTION XI b  6. In either.case care is taken to avoid the separation of the fibre bundles into individual fibres as in this form they suffer damage both here and in the subsequent operation of scutching and increase the amount rejected as fjaste flax. commonly known as tow.   g Scutching. The internal pith or boon has novi to be   removed from the stalk with as little injury as possible this operation is known as scutching. The old method which may still be adopted in very small farms is to beat the stalks by hand with wooden mallets. This method however has now given way-to treating the stalks by machinery which may be semi-manual necessitating skilled labour or in the larger factories by machines operated by unskilled labour. In the former method the straw is fed in handfuls to a machine which consists of a number of steel blades set on a rotor which knock the boon from the flax wooden beaters fixed to a rapidly revolving wheel see Eig. 7 are also used.  This type of machine is preferred in Belgium for producing the highest grades of Courtrai fibre but developments have taken place to eliminate hand feeding machines and machines such as are illustrated in Eigs. 8. and 9 are now extensively used.' These are of fairly light construction with variable speed gears.  Elax after scutching is bought by dealers who grade press and store it before they sell it to spinning mills. . It should be carefully stored in rooms regulated to 60-65f° relative humidity at 18-20° C.  5. SPINNING. The process of spinning is' roughly parallel to cotton spinning preparatory processes of hackling to parallelise the fibres by drawing them through successively finer combs to form a sliver are followed by successive stages of drawing and twisting to provide the ultimate yarn. The Continental practice is dry spinning the process is therefore purely mechanical and offers no opportunity for chemical additions  The machines used .however are different from cotton spinning machines and are not inter changeable. It is not proposed to describe the machinery of a spinning factory in detail but it will be noted from the flow sheet that all the fibre has to be passed through hackling machines of which there will be two or three in a Idrge factory., Fig. 3 -Flax Retting Crate.  Fig. 5 -Belgian Flax Drying Building constructed as a strong point .  A810, , , SECTION XI b  7. Figs. 10 and 11 show the general design of a haokling  machine and Fig. 12 an arrangement of machines in  a factory. Extraneous substances are removed from the fibre by this process and eventually it is split  up from comparatively large bundles into the finest condition possible without undue loss of material.  The machine is not of very heavy construction and the mechanism and operation is of a complicated nature.  The majority of second-grade flax known as to is produced from the material discarded by the hackling machine. This is re-processed to provide inferior quality flax yarns.  After hackling the flax is put into wicker baskets holding about 100/150 lbs. and sent to the sorters rooms. Fig. 13 shows the state of the flax as it arrives after passing through the hackling machines. From the sorters room the flax passes through various rooms of machinery to be prepared suitably for the spinning machines. Fig. 14 shows the type of spinning machine of which there are a considerable number installed in each spinning factory.  6. BLEACHING AND BOILING The subsequent manipulation of the yarns depends on the use to which the linen is to be put. Thus for a number of military purposes linen is preferred in unbleached form in which case the yarns are merely doubled mechanically to the requisite quality or sized with starch and a softening agent to form a warp this is vroven with unsized weft into fabric subsequently given a light boil in a mildly alkaline soap solution to remove the size dried and mechanically finished.  For other purposes it is necessary to purify the yarn or fabric by bpiling and bleaching. The former is usually carried out in a suspension of hydrated lime or weak solution of sodium carbonate after boiling the material is washed with water treated in very dilute acid to neutralise residual alkali and bleached in weak hypochlorite solutions.  It is necessary to avoid strong alkalies  .in the boiling operation as these have a detrimental effect on the linen. Moreover the presence of copper or iron salts on the yarn or fabric produces stains during boiling and local over-attack during bleaching with resultant weakness or even complete destruction of the fabric., SECTION Xl b  8. 7. METHODS 0 / ATTACK- ' A. Without Stcrres.  i Incendiarism. Review of the several processes of flax indicates that the easiest and most compre hensive way to destroy flax in hulk is hy incendiarism either   a In the harns during drying and de seeding.  h After retting if it is artificially dried.  c After scutching in the dealers' stores.  d In the sorting rooms of the spinning mills..  1i- During Retting.  This process is a bottleneck and inter ference is possible by interrupting fermen tation or the formation of bacteria. by introducing bacterial poisons or by promoting bacterial attack.  Local c /erheating can be obtained by inserting quicklime either in powder form or in small lumps into occasional bundles of raw flax before it is immersed in water. This method has the advantage of producing excessive lobal alkalinity which will not   only interfere with the normal bacteria process but cause damage to the flax at the same time.  The alternative method of bacterial poisons can only be used to effect local poisoning within the mass of flax but as this will 1 ad to irregular retting it may  'prove of value. Possible poisons are copper salts in the form of either copper sulphate of the Bordeaux mixture of the potato or grape grower. Small pieces of copper sulphate.should be inserted into occasional bundles or'Bordoaux mixture sprinkled thereon.   -i Promotion of bacterial attack leads to over-retting and excessive damage to the flax. it can be brought about by using bacterial food in the form of a nitrogen supplier such as common agricultural. fertilizer sulphate of ammonia and nitrate of soda and alternatively manure. Inserting handfuls into occasional bundles of flax before they are immersed in the water as with the quicklime will be sufficient., Fig. 10 -Hackling Machine.  Fig. 11 -Hackling Machine for Coarse Flax and Hemp.  plate  .813', Fig. 12 -Arrangement of Hackling Machines.  Fig. 14 -Typical Spinning Machine   .814, SECTION XI b  C. B. With Stores.  i Scutohing Machinery. This machinery forms a bottleneck operation. As will be seen from the illustrations it is of light construction and small charges will do very considerable damage. These should be placed in con tact with the gear boxes and motors of which there may be two or three on each machine. Destruction of any individual part can be easily repaired.   ii Hackling Machines. Charges should be placed on the gear boxes. These are accessible by lifting off the covering plates shown in Eig. 11. Under the portion marked   cover plate' Eig. 11 is a shaft driving the combing mechanism -a light charge should be placed on this.  Hackling machines have to be very accurately set and the slightest malad justment on the framework or shafts caused by a blow with a piece of wood would necessitate re-adjusting the machine.  8 SUPPLEI NTARY TARGETS.   a River Retting. Cut anchors holding plants and flax to riversides.   b Tbreshing and de-seedlng. Handle roughly to break stems and cause difficulty in retting.   c Sorting and preparation before retting. This should be done as carelessly as possible. Weeds and damaged and disused stalks should not be removed. This could only be done if labour employed was new and inexperienced .  9 CONCLUSION.  Incendiarism should be adopted as the least difficult and at the same time the most destructive  Interference with the retting process would only destroy a few tons and after the first inter ference supervision would be increased smashing of the scutching or hackling machines 7 /ould be preferable to this., SECTION XI. 1.  o HEMP ANi MANILA.  1. ILTNODUCTIGN. Eneray-cooupied Europe is suffering from an acute shortage of high .grade.marine corda&e and tinder twine and in place cf manila hemp and sisal soft hemp is being substituted for marine cordage and also for military haulage ropes.  There is considerable production of soft hemp in Italy and Russia and several other European countries to meet a large demand for military and  A.R.P. requirements. Hemp fibre is of particular value on account of its length strength and durability but lacks the flexibility and elasticity of flax. It does not bleach /ell but is not affected by the action of water. The best hemps are grown round  Bologna in Italy followed by the I'rench hemps from the Grenoble district and the Russian which are coarser but more pliable and stronger.  2. HEMP PLANT. The hemp plant is of the stinging nettle variety. Nhen grown for fibre production it attains a height of 5/12 ft. and is straight and erect.  3. PREPARATION. The plants are either pulled or cut and the stems laid out to dry or hung on wooden frames for a few days. After the removal of the leaves branches and roots the sticks are bundled ready for retting. In Italy and some parts of France the plants are retted in soft still or running water washed and carefully dried by artificial heat or spread over a field. In Russia and other cold countries the stems are retted on the snow.  Stems are next beaten to remove the bark either by manual labour or machinery.  The fibres in all oases are scutched in a similar manner t r. flax and the raw hemp is obtained in narrow ribbons of 3/9 ft. in length.  It is then processed through hackling carding and spinning machines very similar to those employed for flax the machines being modified to deal with the different structure of the fibre., SECTION Zliill MANILA Ha&IP. Manila hemp belongs to the banana family and -is almost exclusively confined to the Philippine Islands. A hard fibre is produced and is manu factured for ships ropes and cables by similar processes to the European hemp. R.535., SECTION XI 1.   RAYON AND STAPLE FIBRE  1. INTRODUCTION. The extreme restriction of wool and cotton supplies has forced the Axis to rely increasingly upon the output of rayon hemp etc. for the manufacture of military clothing and equipment and probably exclusively for the manufacture of civilian clothing. In addition rayon is an important factor in tho manufacture of parachutes for mines and flares insulating tape sails and other miscellaneous articles.  Rayon is the general name of filaments made from various solutions of modified cellulose by pressing or forcing the cellulose solution through an orifice and solidifying it in the form of a filament by means of some coagulating medium.  Of recent years there has been a further development in the rayon industry namely the use of staple fibre which can be spun satisfactorily in conjunction with cotton wool or silk. It is produced from either wood pulp or cotton linters and modern methods of its production closely follow the principles of rayon production it is not  therefore proposed to deal more fully with this subject though there are necessarily variations in the preparation of the cellulose solution and spinning bath especially in the. finishing processes.  Staple fibre is principally employed in the manufacture of uniforms clothing etc.  The larger works producing rayon are graded priority 1 for attack.  2. SUMMARY OF MANUFACTURING PROCESSES. Of the several processes of rayon manufacture employed in Axis and occupied countries of Europe four distinct types have commercial importance. These are as follows   a Ylscose.  See over., SECTIOM XI d  WOOD PULP OR COTTOM Digested with caustic soda vl ALKA.LI-CELI.ULOSE Treated with Carbon Bisulphide 'I CELLULOSE XANTHATE Dissolved in caustic soda  vl  VISCOSE Spinning W  RAW CELLULOSE FILAIVlEra S Bleaching-Washing ' / VISCOSE RAYON  Pure Cellulose   b Cellulose Acetate. COTTON Treated with Acetic Anhydride vt/ CELLULOSE ACETATE Dissolved in Acetone vt/ CELLULOSE ACETATE SOLUTION Spinning  CELLULOSE ACETATE FILAMENTS Bleaching-Washing   4  CELLULOSE-ACETATE RAYON  Cellulose Acetate Ester   0 Cuprammonlum. COTTON Dissolve in Ammoniacal Copper Oxide Solution  CUPRAMMONIUM SOLUTION OF COTTON Spinning 4 RAW CELLULOSE FILAMENT  BleachingWashing  CUPRAMMONIUM RAYON Pure Cellulose, SECTION XI a  3. 'd Nitro-Cellulose.  COTTON Nitration  NITRO-CELLULOSE Dissolve in Alcohol Ether . APPROX. 207 SOLUTION OE NITRO-CELLULOSE IN ALCOHOL ETHER Spinning  ..  i  NITRO-CELLULOSE FILAMENTS Denitration  RAW CELLULOSE FILAMENT Bleaching-Washing  CHARDONNET RAYON  3. RAW MATERIALS.  a Wood Pulp. Wood pulp is the more important raw material in the production of rayon and its preparation is fully described in Section XI a . Gummy and resinous elements deleterious to the rayon solutions must first be removed.   b Cotton Llnters Raw cotton contains about 80/G5fo cellulose and since the development of the cotton linter machine which strips off the staple' cotton fibre from the cotton seed after ginning it has become increasingly valuable for  -the manufacture of rayon. .  Cotton is transported in a highly compressed state and has to be mechanically pre treated to loosen it and remove such impurities as sand and dust. The cotton linters also contain small quantities of wax which is removed by boiling with caustic soda or soda ash in an open pan for 2 -4 hours.  The cellulose raw material is then bleached in a kier by boiling in a weak solution of 2-67o chlorine finally it is scoured washed  in clear soft water free from iron and manganese and dried. It is then usually pressed intj sheets although some rayon works prepare their own cotton cellulose and thus make this process unnecessary. . .  4. THE VISCOSE PROCESS. The bulk of rayon is produced by.this method which consists of the chemical preparation of, SECTION XI a  4. a syrupy liquid alkali-cellulose-xanthate this is then forced through a nozzle into an acid coagulating hath after which the thread is formed by spinning See Eig. 1 o  Raw Materials.  Bleached wood pulp -in the form of cardboard-like sheets 5 mm. thick x 60 cm. square or Cotton linters -in bales or sheets.  Caustic soda liquor.  Sulphuric acid.  Carbon bisulphide - this is highly in flammable and its vapours are poisonous .  Method.   i Mercerising. To form alkali-cellulose the sheets of wood pulp or cotton linters are steeped in caustic soda by placing them vertically in the tank part of a mercerising trough Eig. 2 between perforated iron plates and running in caustic soda solution. When saturation is complete the caustic soda solution is drained off and the rest of the liquor pressed out by forcing forward the hydraulic ram. The moist cake is then discharged into breakers Eig. 3 where it is broken down into granules about 2 mm. diameter by a pair of shredders fitted with a pair of blades which carry serrated shoes. ' The breakers are driven by electric motors through gearing.  The granulated material is then placed in aging cans for a minimum period of 48 hours at an even temperature of between 10° C. and 25° C. depending upon the individual works.   ii Cellulose Xanthate. The mercerised cellulose is thon treated with carbon bisulphide to form a golatinous mass known as cellulose xanthate. This operation is effected in churns 2 m. long x 160 cm. diameter rotating about a horizontal axis Fig. 4 the alkali-cellulose is placed in a churn and a measured quantity of carbon bisulphide fed in through the trunnion bearing. When the xanthate has reached the desirod concentration the excess carbon bisulphide gas is exhausted before the removal of the door and the xanthate is then dumped into bins., Fig. 1 -Viscose Process -Illustrative Flowsheet.  Fig. 2 -Mercerising Trough.  A815,   Fig. 3 -Alkali Cellulose Breaker.  Fig. 4 -Cellulose Xanthate Churn.  A816, SECTION XI a  5. As carbon bisulphide has a very un pleasant smell is injurious to health and highly inflammable special ventilation precautions have to be taken and the gas is stored undor water in a tank some distance  away.   iii Viscose The cellulose xanthate is then dissolved in caustic soda solution to form viscose a syrupy yellow liquid. The xanthate is fed from churns down a chute into mixing vessels filled with rotating paddles. These mixers are jacketted for brine circulation to keep an even temperature. A measured quantity of caustic soda solution is added to the mixing tank and stirred for about'two hours until a clear solution is obtained. The viscose is then blown by compressed air into a blending tank.  Note The number of mixers corresponds to the number of churns and they are of the same size.   iv . Blending.  Thorough blending is achieved by circu lating the viscose from the bottom of the tank.through a pump to the top where it falls over a distributing cone and is rotated by means of paddles. The tank is jacketted and brine circulated to obtain an even temperature.   v Ripening. Before spinning can be undertaken the vviscose must be ripened a process which takes 1 about 72 hours at a critically controlled  temperature say 17° to 18° C. depending on the factory. For this purpose the viscose is stored in.tanks of about 5 m. high and 2 m. diameter it is filtered three or four times during the ripening process to prevent any grit or fibrous matter clogging the holes of the nozzles when spinning. Finally the viscose is pumped to tanks where the air bubbles are removed by vacuum as air bubbles cause the breaking of filaments formed by the holes of the nozzle.  During the whole of the process exact temperature control is essential.   vi Spinning. The de-aerated viscose is then forced from the tanks by means of compressed air   about 3 kg./sq.cm. through the nozzles and into the acid spinning bath containing 9.2% sulphuric acid Fig. 5 ., SECTION XI a  6. The nozzles Fig. 6 are small cups or platinum gold iridium or tantalum about 1 cm.' in diameter and 1 cm. deep with 20 to 50 or even more holes drilled in the bottom. Each nozzle produces filaments as the viscose passes through the holes into the acid spinning bath Fig. V which neutralises the alkali solvent of the spinning solution regenerating the cellulose in the form of threads which are picked up by a pulley and fod down a funnel into a revolving pot 8 000 to 10 000 r.p.m. . This gives the fibres a twisting motion forming a thread and at the same time the centrifugal action drives the remaining acid out' of the yarn which builds up in the pot to form a  'cake'. See Fig. 8 .  The atmosphere in the spinning room is maintained under the following conditions   a At an even temperature of 72° F.  b Humid by means of water sprays.  c Ventilated by exhauster fans to remove toxic hydrogen sulphide fumes . Great care is taken to keep the acid content of the bath'at a constant concentration as the yarn becomes brittle'if the concent ration is too high   vii Washing and Drying. The cakes of rayon are passed through various open vessels in which they are   a De-sulphurized by sodium sulphate.  b V/ashed with water.  c Bleached with sodium hypochlorite.  d Made slightly acid with diluted hydrochloric acid.  e Washed in soapy water. Finally the cakes are dried in an ovon   viii Machinery. 1 ' Unless the works have their own central power station very little steam is used in the process. The bulk of the-machines are electrically driven and this power is usually obtained from the grid system.  The following are the main electrically driven machines in a typical installation, Fig. 6 -Spinning Rose with 40 Holes of  0.15 mm. dia. Fig. 7 -Acid Bath showing large nozzles lifted out for inspection., , SECTION XI a  7. 3 frequency changers 5 churns 5 breakers 5 mixers 2 hydraulic pumps 1 viscose pump 2 caustic liquor pumps 3 acid pumps 2 ammonia compressors 2 ventilating fans 2 brine pumps 2 air compressors  exhausters Spinning frames.  5. CELLULOSE-ACETATE PROCESS. In the acetate process the cellulose combines with acetic acid to form cellulose acetate. This is soluble in certain organic solvents having a very high rate of evaporation so that when the cellulose acetate solution is forced through the nozzle into warm air thread is formed and the solvent evaporated. No subsequent chemical treatment is necessary.  This process differs from the viscose process in that cellulose xanthate must be spun immediately whereas dry cellulose acetate can be stored indefinitely  Raw Materials.  Cotton linters or Tfood pulp.  Acetic acid.  Sulphuric acid or Sodium carbonate or Liquid chlorine.  Acetic anhydride.  Method .   i Preparation of Cotton Linters. After the bales have been broken up by hand the cotton linters are fed into a machine where they are teased out until a crumb-like con sistency is reached. The crumbs are then passed through a drier consisting of a steel frame covered with sheet metal about 10 m. long and 3 m. thigh fitted with reciprocating wire mesh trays through which hot air is blown upwards. The motion of the trays causes the cotton to be carried forward from one end of the drier to the other see Eigs. 9 and 10 .  As the material emerges it is loaded into metal tubs which are raised by a lift to the acetylating plant., SECTION XI d  8.  ii Acetylation.. This takes plaoe in a building usually of three storeys.  The dried cellulose is tipped from the tubs down a chute into aluminium churns which are equipped with internal rotating paddles electrically driven through gears by a small motor fitted to the chassis  A small quantity of glacial acetic acid just sufficient to moisten the cellulose is then poured into the churns and the whole agitated for about three hours at an optimum temperature of 25° C. Each churn contains about 100 kg. and feeds three mixers.  The mixers are in the form of troughs 2 m deep 2 m. long and 1 5 m. wide made of riveted steel and lined with copper to prevent corrosion of the steel. They are fitted with rotating bronze bledes which turn the material over and the troughs are jacketted for circulating brine to keep the temperature constant at 25° C.  Specific quantities of glacial acetic acid acetic anhydride and a catalyst such as sulphuric acid are run into the mixer the paddies are started and the cellulose from the churns is fed slowly into the mixers. At the end of 12 hours the cellulose acetate forms a collodial solution of an opaque grey syrupy liquid.   iii Ripening. The mixer is then tilted and the solution discharged.into vats -where it is stored for three days in a room kept at 25° C. During this period the acetylation is completed and tests taken from time to time ensure correct ripening.   iv Precipitation and Washing. The vats are then withdrawn from the ripening room emptied into stainless steel tanks 2 m. in diameter and 3 m. deep and the solution mixed with a predetermined quantity of weak acid at a temperature of 25° 0. The tanks are equipped with paddles.  The acid solution 25f° is drained off and the acetate washed in a weak acetic acid solution and then with cold water in a precipitation vessel.  In modern practice this is followed by washing in hot water vessels provided with blades whicflu violently agitate the liquid., Fig.10 -3-stage Drier with band conveyor discharge end.  Fig.11 -Acetate Spinner.  A819 j, SECTION XI d  9. The contents of these hot water vessels are swilled out on to vibrating screens where the water is removed by suction and the acetate falls on to a conveyor band below. on which it passes through a drier. '  The cellulose acetate is then ready for storing.   v Spinning. As it is essential that the spinning solution should be uniform the batches from the driers are divided equally between hoppers. A wheeled truck then takes an equal portion from each hopper for delivery into the mixers which are similar to those used for acetylation. The cellulose acetate is dissolved in acetone until the mixture forms a thick colourless syrup known as dope.  The dope is then passed through filter presses to remove any solid matter undissolved cellulose acetate fibre grit etc. After filtration the dope is stored-in tanks long enough to allow the air bubbles to rise to the surface or alternatively they are removed by vacuum.  It is then forced by compressed air through a final filter to nozzles in parallel on either side of the spinning machines. The nozzles are nickel drilled with up to 100 holes and are about 15 ft. above floor level they are encased in rectangular wooden boxes extending downwards for some 12 ft. to the twisting and winding mechanism hot air 60° C. being circulated upwards through the boxes. This causes the acetone solvent in the dope to evaporate and to be drawn off by the air exhausting system leaving the cellulose acetate in the form of a pencil of fine filaments which are-wound on to bobbins rotating at 10 000 r.p.m. or on to centrifugalpots in the same manner as in spinning viscose.  See Eigs. 11 12 and 13 . The rotation of the bobbins and pots gives a twisting movement to the pencil of filaments thus forming a single thread.   vi Machinery. The machines supplying compressed air vacuum brine or temperature control ammonia for brine cooling are usually in one building a typical installation being as follows  2 horizontal twin cylinder air compressors 4 vertical 2 ammonia 0 -4 ., SECTION XI d  10. 2 exhausters 7 centrifugal brine pumps 3 2-throw ram pUmps and hydraulic  accumulators.  These machines are electrically driven  direct or belt . Another room houses the foUowin - additional machinery  5 vertical 2-oylinder ammonia compressors 3 horizontal single cylinder low speed ammonia compressors.  Tor the electric power supply the following would be installed  3 410 KVA 166.7/250 cycle 73 v. generators driven by synchronous motors for supplying the spinning motors.  1 500 KVA 6300/220 v. three phase trans former.   vii Acetone Recovery. The acetone vapour carried away by the circulating hot air from the nozzles is cooled in a chamber into which water spray is injected. The water with the acetone in solution is pumped into copper fractionating columns which have a steam-heat.ed coil at the bottom the acetone being liberated from the top as a vapour.   viii Acetic Acid Recovery. Glacial acetic acid is recovered' from the 25f° aqueous solution formed when the cellulose acetate is precipitated. The dilute acid enters at one end of a battery of 12 stirred copper vessels and is met with a.counter-flow of ethyl acetate from the opposite end. The ethyl acetate acetic and water mixture is then distilled in a copper fractionating column leaving the acetic acid at the bottom. The acid is finally distilled to remove.the impurities.   ix Acetic Anhydride Plant. Some of the 25fo acetic acid after pre cipitation of cellulose acetate is used for making acetic anhydride and is obtained by running the dilute acid into steel vessels 10 ft. in diameter and 5 ft. deep fitted with paddles and gas heated. An equal quantity of sodium carbonate is added to neutralise the acetic acid forming sodium acetate which is evaporated almost to dryness. Sulphur and chlorine gas are then admitted to the vessel and the mixture heated acetic anhydride sodium chloride and sodium sulphate being formed., Fig.13 -Acetate Spinning Machine front and aide elevation.  A820, SECTION XI d  11. 6-CUPRAIMOEIUM PROCESS.   Note As the Cuprammonium and Nitro-Cellulose processes are comparatively rarely used a loss detailed description is given.  Raw Materials.  Bleached and washed cotton  or Wood Pulp depending upon proximity of supplies standard deliveries  and price .  Ammoniacal solution of copper oxide.  Method.   i Solution The solvent an ammoniacal solution of copper oxide is stored in tanks at the required standard of concentration. From these tanks it passes to the mixing'tanks when the necessary amount has been trans ferred the bleached and washed cotton is added and thotoughly mixed for a few hours by automatic agitators. It is essential that a constant low temperature is main tained .and all cotton dissolved until the required viscosity is obtained.   ii Filtration. By means of compressed air acting on the surface of the liquid in the tanks or in some cases by means of small pumps the dissolved cotton is forced through a series of two three or more filters which are exceedingly fine and made of iron or nickel gauze.  The completely filtered solution Is then forced into large tanks' and delivered in pipes to the thread forming department. The pungent fumes must be removed by some means especially during the cleansing and changing of the filters.   iii Spinning The aqueous spinning' solution is squirted  'from fine nozzles into an acid or an alkali coagulating bath. After coagulation and collection in suitable receptacles the threads are washed dried in warm air and stretched. -. .  The diameter of the filament.s. approximately equals-the diameter of the spinning nozzles but a much finer filament can be made from the same size orifice by the stretch ' spinning process., SECTION XI a  12. Every attempt is m de to recover the copper and ammonia with a view to economical production.  7. NITRO-CELLULOSE PROCESS. Raw Materials.  Bleached and washed cotton.  Nitric acid.  Sulphuric acid.  Ether.  Alcohol.  Sodium hydrosulphide.  Method.   i Nitration. The bleached and washed cotton is placed in a mixture of nitric and sulphuric acid in a few hours the cotton is converted to nitro-cellulose which is a highly inflammable substance unsuitable for the formation of textile thread. When the desired degree of nitration is obtained the mass is subjected to pressure and as much of the excess acid as possible is squeezed out of the nitro cellulose. It is then thoroughly washed to  . remove all traces of acid the bulk of the water being removed by a hydro-extractor the substance is now much less inflammable..   ii Dissolution and Eiltration. Equal quantities of ether and alcohol are now added to the. nitro-cellulose to dissolve it and form collodion this is effected by thorough automatic agitation. The collodion is filtered and stored in tanks until required for spinning.   iii Spinning. Either wet spinning or dry spinning then takes place. In the former case the solution of correct viscosity is forced through jets with multiple nozzles into a coagulating bath in the latter it is coagulated in a current of warm air the alcohol and ether in the air being recovered for further use.  As the threads are still highly inflammable they are subjected to a process of denitration by sodium hydrosulphide to prepare them for commercial uses. The threads aro then bleached stretched and dried., SECTION XI a 13. ACTION. 1. VISCOSE PROCESS. VJtthout Stores. Waste carbon bisulphide this is an expensive material and highly inflammable. With Stores.  a Vulnerable Points.  i ' Hydrahlio Pumps to be found near mercerising shop. Place it lb. or 3 lb. H.E. charge on casing.  ii A  frosted suction pipes and smell of ammonia. Place it lb. or 3 lb. H.E. charge on cylinder. v  iii A spinning shop .. Place it lb or 3 lb. charge on flywheel or compressor cylinder.  iv A shop -distinguishable by presence of lead-lined tanks . f ' . 4 Small charge H.E. or sledge hammer action -these .are made of very brittle acid-resisting metal.  N.B All machines of one type should be put out of action and spares destroyed.  b Power'Supply  Attack generators if from central power station.. Attack transformers if from grid. The frequency changers producing high frequency current for the centrifugal pots and bobbins of the spinning machine are a special target. Their destruction would cause considerable delay owing to difficulty of replacement.., SECTION XI d  14 .  c Churns and Mixers. 5 Attack churns with a li lb. or 3 lb. charge on trunnion bearings introducing carbon bisulphide.  Attack mixers with a Is lb. or 3 lb. charge on cast'iron shell nuisance value only .  There are an equal number of churns and mixers in the xanthate and viscose processes say 5 of each.   d Incendiarism.  As carbon bisulphide is highly inflammable it is usually stored in a tank some distance from the works and special anti-fire pre cautions are taken. There is however a quantity in the measuring tanks situated above the mixer floor. If this liquid were released and ignited it would cause a fire on both floors generating suffocating fumes of sulphur dioxide .  Release carbon bisulphide and ignite using several tysule capsules with plenty of wick.  2. ACETATE PROCESS. Tflthout Stores.   i Incendiarism. The following materials and reagents are inflammable  Cotton linters ' hot very .  Glacial acetic acid.  Acetic anhydride.  Ethyl acetate.  Acetone vapour round spinning  nozzle. Dry cellulose acetate. Rayon yarn in stores moderately .  Acetone Recovery.  Acetone is expensive and its recovery important. Loss of circulating air between the spinning and the water sprays in the cooling.chambers would cause loss of acetone-laden water.  Fire could also' be caused in the acetone distillation plant., 53CTI0N XI d 15. Tifith Stores. Attaok i T Generators or transformers frequency changers.  ii A  See Viscose Process for action .  iii A  See Viscose Process for action ., 1. SECTION XII. OPTICAL GLASS AND INSTRUMENTS. OPTICAL GLASS 1. INTRODUCTION. Raw optical glass is perhaps the narrowest bottleneck in the enemy.armaments industry Only three producers are known in Germany and one in France Parra-Mantois Le Yesinet -capacity 100 tons finished glass per annum . The importance of the uses can scarcely be overrated. On the other.hand the total enemy demand for optical glass including wastage is probably only in the region of 200 tons per annum to meet which there was a pre-war production capacity of 600 tons per annum. Normally raw blanks for grinding are manufactured in large batches greatly in excess of immediate requirements and substantial stocks would be widely distributed all over Germany and elsewhere on the continent with the instrument makers. In order to affect instrument production therefore damage to factories producing optical glass would have to be on a scale ensuring prolonged interruption of output. Certain makers of laboratory glass are potential manufacturers of optical glass. Since at least a dozen-French optical instrument manufacturers are probably using glass from Le Vesinet this target is graded. 1 plhs the highest priority for attack 2. MANUFACTURE. The manufacture of glass for lenses. prisms and optical instruments differs widely in equipment and processes from that used .for other grades of glass. It is essentially small batch working in special fire clay pots each heated by a separate furnace. There is a wide range of optical glasses each possessing special optical characteristics such as refractive index mean dispersion index relative dispersion for different portions of' the spectrum.and ratio between refraction and mean dispersion. The two main types of glass used in optical work are those containing lead which have both high refraction and dispersion indices and a low ratio value and alkali-lime in which both.are low the dispersion being lower than the refraction-so.that the ratio is correspondingly high. These two main types are known as ' flint and crownrespectively but more than a hundred different qualities may be produced by a. single maker. -' I I -.17 A characteristic feature of optical glass making plant and equipment is.the individual development, SECTION XII. 2. by each maker. There is no standard type of machine or furnace made and supplied by equipmont specialists as in most other industries consequently great variations in detail may be met with though the general sequence of operations is follbwed at all works 3. POTS The pots or crucibles in which the opticalglass is made are manufactured at the glass works and constitute a vital and vulnerable foundation on which the whole of the work depends. They are hand-made from special refractoryfireclay and are usually of two patterns The open pot about 3 ft diameter at the top tapering slightly to the bottom 3 ft high with a wall thickness of about S inches is used for optical glass. The dome-covered pot with side opening near the top for charging and stirring of the same order of dimensions except that the height is increased to about 4 6 t is used for ordinary  glass. These pots require a minimum period of three months at atmospheric temperature for gradual dryingbefore firing. Each pot will make a charge of several hundredweights of glass and can only be used once.  The pot consumption of a medium to large optical glass works is of the order of 10 per week.  After the pot has been fired at the normal glass making temperature it is charged with the carefully prepared mixture of ingredients to which is added a proportion of broken glass of the same opticalcharacteristics as the glass it is desired to produce. The molten glass is gently stirred by hand or by a simple mechanical stirring arrangement to ensure uniformity of composition throughout the mass and to free the charge from air bubbles. The pot is removed from the furnace and after cooling is broken and chipped away from the glass vfaich is also broken up into lumps of suitable size. These are examined and pieces free from veins and bubbles are selected out for further treatment. The boxes containing the selected lumps of the same quality are marked for identification and the material is passed on to the softening and shaping furnaces. 4. FURNACES. 1 111' V1 . 1 The furnaces are of simple jregenarator design., FIG. 1.  Domed glass pots used for ordinary glass similar in construction to the open pots used for optical glass., SECTION XII.  3. built of firebrick and silica'blocks braced with buck -Staves and tie-rods. A separate furnace is provided for each.pot. Producer gas from a common generator is generally used for firing a number of furnaces but individual firing by noal or oil may be used. .  Por small reheating muffle furnaces town gas firing is usual.  5 SHAPING AND MOULDING. t '  Pieces of glass of the requisite quality are heated in a muffle furnace to the softening point and .in this condition are roughly patted to. shape as prisms lenses or rectangular slabs and whilst still hot are subjected to one or more pressings in moulds  . fitted with a suitable plunger  6. ANNEALING- The finished pieces are transferred to annealing chambers .consisting of cylindrical or rectangular steel containers of the order of 5 x 6f.x 6'f lined with insulating material. The rate of fall in temperature is thermostatically controlled in accordance with a pre-determined cooling programme The temperature can be maintained constant for any desired period at the expiration of which a lower temperature is automatically established.  Rectangular slabs and large pieces are ground and polished on two opposite surfaces and examined visually for-.veining and other defects. Any defective portions are cut out and remelted with new stock of the same composition.  The finished products moulded to correct shape and size and annealed have a slightly matt surface. They are .transferred to stock bins of which there are many hundreds -one for each size and shape of the same optical properties.  The pieces are despatched to the optical instrument maker for final precision grinding polishing and mounting .  ACTION.  A INTERFERENCE'WITH ROTS.   1 r1 ' '  Pots in any stage of manufacture or completed in store are very fragile and if cracked are useless At a large optical glass works a bomb fell near a number  . of pots. and destroyed and damaged' several.' The   / -remainder were examined carefully. and ..a number were passed as fit for service Ttidy all had fine hair cracks and fell to'pieces whsn fired . J .. ., SECTION XII  4. Action Break or crack all pots by hammer blows If partially dried and soft demolish or deform with iron bars spades etc.  Result Complete stoppage of optical glass making for about three months. Owing to stocks of finished optical glass the effect would not be felt immediately but three months output would be lost.  B. INTERFERENCE WITH QUALITY. This would only be effective if carried out consistently by inside operatives.  Action   i Lump Glass in Boxes before reheating and moulding. Exchange pieces of similar appearance but  different optical quality from one box  to another.  Result Optical quality sabotaged. Defect would not be discovered until a much later stage at instrument makers works or in use in the field or laboratory   11 Finished material in store bins. Exchange pieces of similar size shape and colour from one bin to another of different reference number and optical qualities. Reference numbers are sand  blasted faintly on edge of glass but are seldom referred to as reliance is placed on the bin number.  Result As in i discovery would necessitate examination of all places in stock involving a very considerable expenditure of time and labour of farreaching nuisance value  0. INTERFERENCE WITH FURNACES. Critical working temperature may be affected  by altering air and gas damper controls. Reduced temperatures of nuisance value only. This work require considerable technical knowledge and is not recommended  D. INTERFERENCE WITH SERVICES. Gas Producers If major acts of sabotage with explosive destroyed gas producers they could be rebuilt in a few days. Interference with steam and air valves would be unproductive of any useful result., SECTION XII  ELectrloity In ierruption of supply would be of nuisance value only as stoppage would be of comparatively short duration. A few batches of material in the annealers might be spoiled and have to be remelted. Interference with the setting of thermostatic controls would be of nuisance value but would be easily detected.  OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS  1. INTROHJCTION. There are about 20 important optical instrument makers in Germany 12 in France and 8 in the rest of enemy Europe. The estimated personnel in the French industry is 10 500 of  whom 6 000 are employed in 4 works. This compares with 56 000 employed in Germany.  Germany should now be able to supply maintenance requirements of instruments with con siderable ease. Although a high degree of skill and precision is required British experience has shown that girls can be trained in several months to carry out many of the skilled operations particularly in connection with the finishing of optical components.  Thus in relation to current demand instrument capacity cannot be considered a bottleneck. Optical instruments are however a bottleneck in the sense that fighting units are absolutely dependent on optical equipment -periscopes binoculars and telescopes dial sights and directors for artillery navigating and survey instruments and. possibly one of the largest outlets at the moment . the heavy range finders required at the coast batteries being equipped every 4/5 miles on the long enemy coastline. In addition production of particular types of equipment may well be concentrated in a large degree in a few factories specialising in particular lines of production. Thus damage to work in production would deprive units of the essential equipment required for training  The leading optical .instrument makers are therefore graded priority 1 for attack.  2. PROCESSES. Two classes of work are carried out   a Grinding and polishing of lenses and mirrors., SECTION XII  6   b Precision machining and calibrating of metal parts.  a Grinding and Polishing. Lenses as delivered from the moulds are mounted on a revolving vertical head and are polished by rouge powder in felt-lined wooden cups to which a horizontal circular sweeping motion is transmitted by means of lever arms.   b Machinery. The equipment consists of a large number of small precision machine tools lathes shaping machines drills jig boring machines and engine dividers. The installation resembles the equipment to be found at any light engineering works  VULNERABILITY .  Owing to the system of dispersion of machines throughout various shops of the factory there is no bottleneck line of machine tools and destruction of any one would only reduce the output proportionately for a short period. The engine dividing and the jig boring machines are. the most important machines and damage to these would cause the greatest inconvenience.  ACTION  GRINDING AND POLISHING   a Introduce about .05 or 1/20 of a part per 100 parts of emery flour or slightly coarser rouge into the polishing rouge an even less proportion will be effective. Larger quantities would lead to detection.  b For direct action smash polishing machines with a sledge hammer. The rotating polishing arms are very light and fragile. INSTRUMENTS IN STORE OR DURING TRANSIT.  Introduction of incendiary or explosive devices into packing cases would be the most effective method of ensuring destruction.  In machine shops and assembly shops for precision instruments a small fire could be started and enthusias tically quenched with water and fire-extinguishers by the work people. Excessive use of the hose over machinery and finished parts will cause considerable damage., 1. SECTION XIII BALL AND ROLLER BEARINGS.  1. INTRODUCTION. The leading ball bearing factories are graded 1 for attack. Although there is not an acute shortage of any type of bearing on the continent there is little surplus capacity and production is concentrated in relatively few plants. A successful operation at one large works would create a bottleneck which would have extremely farreaching effects throughout the armaments and engineering industries. Before the war France produced 50 000 bearings a day compared with a German production of 220 000 per day. One smaller works Ifadella at La Ricamerie near St. Etienne is believed to be the only manufacturer in France of needle bearings which are used in the motor car industry. In view of the enemy d.ependence on French motor vehicles for military purposes and the particularly acute shortage of magnetos fuel injection equipment dynamos and starters for motor vehicles all of which require'needle bearings this works is probably a special bottleneck within the industry.  The German ball bearing factories are concentrated in areas visited from time to time by the R.A.F. and if any of them were put out of action the importance of ground operations against the rest would become even greater.  2. GENERAL DESCRIPTION. Ball and roller bearings are now used in practically every type of machinery in which a shaft revolves and where it is essential that friction is kept down to an absolute minimum since bearings of these types have a coefficient of friction roughly one-tenth that of plain bearings. They comprise an inner and an outer race grooved accurately to house the balls or rollers which are ground correctly to about l/l 000 inch and subsequently matched to at least 1/10 000 inch. In fact there is now an International standard so that it is possible' to assemble bearings from parts manufactured in different works. It is essential that the balls and rollers are absolutely accurate in dimensions and sphericity otherwise the'largest will be called upon to support the entire load during each revolution of. the shaft.  A modified form of roller bearing known as a Needle Roller Bearing has its principal application when loads are hot heavy in places where space is limited and the bearing is subject to oscillation or slow rotation.' They are- however occasionally used for. higli speed work. The principle underlying this design is similar to roller bearings' except that the rollers are of very small diameter compared with their length.and only rotate under load.  In order vto-ensure maximum efficiency and to prevent the. crowding of the-balls or rollers under load causing undue heat and wear cages are employed to keep the balls or rollers equidistant. See Fig.l ., S3CTI0N XIII.  2. Whilst all manufacturers employ the same basic methods their machines are likely to differ considerably in detail as over a number of years they have modified and adapted their plant to keep pace with new developments in accordance with their own experience. The trade is in the hands of relatively few firms.  The balls rollers and race's are manu factured from high carbon chrome steel.  MANUFACTURE OF BALLS  3.. PRESSING.  The balls for the smaller bearings are formed by cold heading -e.g. the Manville or Waterbury & Parrel machines Fig.S . The bar or wire rod is fed into the machine sheared to the correct length and then formed between two cup shaped dies. Tha larger balls are hot forged.  Note There will probably be at least 50 similar cold heading machines in a modern plant of moderate size with about 6 hot heading presses.  4. FLASH REMOVAL. After cold heading there is a circumferential rib or fillet on the ball which has to be removed so that the balls may revolve freely in the rough grinding machines. This is achieved by machine filing between two horizontal discs. The upper disc is stationary the lower rotating 'and a certain aaiount of play is allowed between the two.. The balls are fed into the centre of the machine through a hopper..  Note -There will probably be about 50 similar machines in a modern plant of moderate size.  5. ROUGH GRINDING. '  i' v. /.-The .balls .are now rolled in a slot between a lower grinding wheel rotating clockwise at about 900 r.p.m. and an upper driving ring moving counter clockwise at ' 60 r.p.m. A typical machine is shown in Fig. 3. The finer grinding is continued in various types of machines -a typical one being a vertical multiple grooved machine Fig. 4 in which the balls are ground spherically accurate and uniform in size to about .0001 inch. The balls from the hopper fall by gravity into the grooves. Each ball passes once round the disc until it is discharged through.the upper aperture in the fixed disc where it falls out and down a mixing chute and back into the hopper again from which it once more enters the discs but not in the same groove.  Note . There will probably be found at least 100 similar machines in a modern plant of moderate size., , Pig. 4 -Vertical multiple grooved grinding machine.  Fig. 5 -Tumbling barrels.  Fig. 6 -Rotary heat treatment furnace., SECTION XIII.  3. 6. TUMBLING. These barrels see Fig. 5 nre generally about 5 ft. in diameter and rotate at 30 r.p.m. They contain a mixture of fine abrasive grit and water in which the balls revolve thereby attaining a smooth surface they are' then ready for heat treatment.  Note There may be about 20 to 25 tumbling  barrels in a works of moderate size.  7. HEAT TREATMENT. During this process the balls are evenly hardened from centre to surface. Two types of furnaces are used   a Rotary Fig. 6 .  b Rectangular with shaker hearth Fig. 7 .  a Rotary Furnaces are generally of the horizontal drum type and gas fired. The balls are delivered in small batches from a selective feed hopper to the furnace which has a helical path In the lining and by the rotation of the drums the balls ere caused to travel from the hopper end to a small opening in the front from which they are .discharged down a' chute into the quenching bath. The process is continuous and the speed of rotation is controlled to allow the necessary time for the correct heat treatment.  b Rectangular Furnaces. Ths principle of the heat treatment for this furnace is the same as i'n the case of the rotary except that the balls are placed on a shaker hearth which causes them to move slowly through the furnace towards the discharge end. The temporaturs of both types of furnace is 850° Ci and is controlled by recording electrical pyrometers. In modern.plant the readings are registered in a central control room and by a system of coloured lights the operators can adjust the valves of the burners to. maintain the furnaces at the correct temperature.  8. TEMPERING. - The balls are discharged from the furnaces into the quenching baths generally filled with oil but in some bases water depending upon the class of steel. These bathe are fitted with a sloping conveyor the width' of the bath which conveys the balls through the oil at the required speed to ensure correct quenching. The baths are also fitted with a blade agitator the object of which is to remove the air bubbles thereby ensuring even quenching.  In the heat treatment shop there is generally a battery of furnaces and baths say 12, SECTION XIII.  4. a considerable quantity of oil and a temperature control room housing very delicate electrical instruments. This section of the plant is therefore   a Abottleneck  b Vulnerable to incendiary action through the oil cooling baths.  c Vulnerable either to incendiary or sledge hammer action through the electrical control of furnace temperatures. 9 final GRINDING.  In this process as many balls as possible are handled in a batch to ensure accuracy of size  Fig. 8 . The machines are multiple grooved with very hard grinding wheels about 24 diameter rotating at 60 r.p.m. The balls pass through a series of concentric grooves formed in a fixed plate and are rotated by the action of the grinding wheels. The average time for this process is about 12 hours. The balls are passed from groove to groove and redelivered to the machine until the required size and sphericity is obtained.  Note There are many identical machines in this section.  10. POLISHING. This operation taxes place in a number of tumbler barrels Fig. 9 in which the balls are oscillated in contact with leather waste for between 20/40 hours to impart a brilliant surface.  Note In an average plant at least 20 to 30 machines of this type are to be found.  il.. INSPECTION AND GAUGING.  Every ball is subjected to a most careful optical inspection being rolled on a tray and examined under reflected light by a skilled inspector. They are then passed to automatic gauging machines but as most works have evolved machines of their own design it is not possible to give any specific description. Some consist of a guide passing over a series of holes through which the balls drop whin the aperture is of sufficient size to accept them and then fall into drawers below numbered with their respective sizes. These machines classify the balls to limits of approximately one half of 1/10 000 inch.  12. TESTING. Several balls from each batch are tested to destruction in an Amster or other testing machine., , UMLHIAKING  MEAD   3 3  IFig.10 -Blanchard side grinding machine  -Cincinnati centreless grinding machine  Fig.11  W784  Fig.12 -Van Norman external Fig.13 -Van Norman internal automatic radius grinder. automatic radius grinder., SffTTIOH XIII 5. Three balls are held columnwise between the anvils of the press and enclosed in a bullet-proof chamber. The load is gradually applied until rupture is effected and the. crushing strength automatically recorded. .' p. . . 't. ....  MANd ffACTUR-E 01 ROLLSRS. ' 13.ROLLERS. ' v . ''i ' ' '. The roller bearing was evolved from the ball bearing. At first long hollers were used 'but in practice it was found that the rollers tended to lack parallelism with the axis of the shaft about which they revolved. This.difficulty was eventually overcome by the introduction of shorter rollers which arertapered and housed in grooves cut in the inner and outer races.. or between cups' and cones the latter being grooved. Rollers are made on the same machines as are used for the production of races MANUFACTURE OF RACES. 14 PRELIMINARY OPERATION. . . The smaller races are made from bars from which the inner and outer races are made together on a four spindle automatic machine such as the G.ridley of which there are usually a considerable number oil is used as a coolant for this operation. Larger races are generally'produced from tubes or forgings whilst very large races for revolving turre'taV etc .y are of cast steel. The forged races before passing to the machine shop are normalised ' annealed and then treated to remove the scale. 15. SIDE GRINDING. A EM . in modern practice this is effected on such machines as the Blanchard Fig. 10 . In this machine the work is laid our a-rotary .magnetic chuck by operating the traverse .control the. chuck is moved horizontally until i-ts centre is under the face of the cylinder wheel. In this position the chuck is rotated continuously and the wheel head is fed downwards until the desired thickness is reached. These machines are. controlled by means of push buttons the mechanism is delicate and-would require an expert-to repair any damage. A moderate sized works would be unlikely to have more than 2 or 3 of these machines and the process may therefore be regarded as a bottleneck. 16. GRINDING. OF OUTSIDE DIAMETERS.  r 1 11--....  This operation is -effected by a centreless grinding-machine such as the -B.S.A. of1 Cincinnati . Fig. ri 1 In principle 'the'Centreless Cincinnati, SECTION XIII  6. comprises two wheels a high speed grinding wheel and an opposed slowly mov ing regulating or feed  wheel forming a grinding throat between them and controlling the sizing speed of rotation and the longitudinal travel or the work. A work rest supports the races during grinding. These machines can also be set for the grinding of roller bearings  taper or parallel .  Like the side grinders these machines also have delicate mechanism requiring expert maintenance or repair. There might be 3 or 4 in a moderate sized works so that this process is also a bottleneck  viV'-'.-  17. HEAT TREATMENT. Heat treatment is then carried out as already described for balls and rollers with the exception that races made from bar are previously bored out on drilling machines.  18. GRINDING BALL AND ROLLER TRACKS. Typical modern machines used for this purpose are -   Van Norman s External Automatic . Radius Grinder Fig. 12 for grinding the inner race.  Van Norman s Internal Automatic  Radius Grinder Fig. 13 for grinding  the outer race.  The grinding of the groove is carried out by means of an oscillating post which causes the grinding wheel to oscillate as it rotates the combined motion grinding out the groove. Both machines operate on the same principle and water is used as a coolant. The grinding of the internal diameter is also carried out on these machines except for very small sizes other types of track grinders will be found.  Van Norman machines -to a large extent foolproof -depend on automatic electrical control governing the various operations for instance when the grinding wheel is brought into the grinding position by means of a light control lever the head automatically starts rotating and oscillating and stops when the required depth of groove has been out. These machines have delicate electrical controls and are vulnerable there are likely to be 15 to 20 of each type in a moderate sized works  19. CAGES. Cages are made of brass steel or any suitable anti-friction metal even bakelised fabric has been tried for light duty. The cages are cut from bar or tube drilled in pairs the rivet holes first and the ball housing afterwards and all burrs are carefully removed. For smaller bearings the cages are usually pressed out., SECTION XIII.  7. FINAL OPERATIONS.  20. ASSEMBLY CLEANING AND PACKING. The complete bearing consisting of inner and outer races with the balls or rollers housed in their respective cages are assembled and freed from dirt and grease in paraffin washing machines in which the paraffin is sprayed under pressure. The paraffin is kept constantly filtered.and the tanks and filtering systems of each machine are separate. Immediately after leaving the final bath the work passes through the greasing machine and is packed. In the packing room every pre caution is taken to exclude any dust.  Note This part of the plant is vulnerable to fire and in most works special precautions are taken such as batteries of foamite cylinders etc.  21. VULNERABLE POINTS. As with most light engineering industries the manufacture of ball and roller bearings is entirely dependent upon electric power. The . destruction of the works transformers if any or alternatively the local distribution transformer should shut down the works until alternative arrangements can be made subject to no stand-by plant being available .  The majority of the operations are carried out on large groups of-almost identical machines but bottlenecks do exist in the heat treatment plant and in the side and outside diameter grinders employed ior. grinding the races. The former is vulnerable to'attack through.the temperature control gear and also to incendiarism owing to the presence of large quantities of dll but as other heat treatment capacity may exist nearby it is probable that arrangements could be  made to carry out this operation elsewhere at the cost of additional transport. On the other hand the side grinders and outside diameter grinders are almost irreplaceable at short notice and as they are so.few in nimber they probably represent the best target in the works. The control gear is often readily accessible through an inspection door held in position by finger-tight milled nuts. The other race grinding maehines are more numerous subsequent operations being distributed over four or five times as many machines. Of these the radius grinders used for forming the grooves in the inner and outer races are the more important owing to their rather special nature.  The cleansing baths offer further opportunities for incendiarism the results of which will depend largely upon the inflammability of the building but considerable damage is likely to accrue from excessive use of water in almost any part of the works., SECTION XIII.  8. An attack upon tool room machines might have considerable value although the greatest effect of this might be more of a long-term nature  Whilst the system of progress control is likely to vary considerably in different works it is probable that each batch of parts will be accompanied round the works by a record card giving the history of previous operations. As in the case of balls it is extremely difficult to detect by sight the exact stage of manufacture considerable confusion would be caused by changing cards between batches.  ACTION  WITHOUT EXPLOSIVES.  Side Grinders or Outside Diameter Grinders  for Races.  Attack with sledge hammer or preferably bend small shafts or lead screws with a crowbar.  Insert incendiary device into inspection door to destroy control apparatus.  Heat Treatment.  Attack temperature control apparatus by sledge hammer methods or with incendiaries.  Ignite oil in quenching baths. If possible the foamite appliances should be discharged away from the proposed fire.  Cleansing Baths.  Ignite cleansing oil immobilise the foamite appliances as above.  General.  Interchange record cards accompanying batches of balls in different stages of manufacture.  Insert abrasives into greasing machine or stocks of grease.  Use excessive water in quenching a decoy fire amongst delicate machines as in the Tool Room.  WITH EXPLOSIVES.  Surface Grinders Blanchard type .   i Destroy the support for the column, SECTION XIII  9. by placing a lb charge on the bed either immediately below one of the supporting points or on the top surface of the bed and close up to a lug of the column   ii Destroy part of the slide of the wheel head by placing a Ig-lb charge on the lower end of the recess formed between the slide and the main column  iii Destroy the wheel spindle by wedging a If lb charge between the underside of the motor and the top of the wheel. The charge should be placed towards the column so that there may be a possibility of the slides being damaged at the same time. Centreless Grinders Cincinnati type .  Insert ij lb. H.E charge into the inspection door and place as high as possible close to a corner.  Place a lb clam on the grinding wheel spindle preferably close to the bearings.  Electric Power  Destroy works or local distribution transformers by H.E /incendiary charges., 1. SECTION XIV.  ABRASIVES AND GRINDING WHEELS.  1. INTRODUCTION. Grinding operations are essential in armament and engineering works of all kinds where accurate surfaces and dimensions to close gauge limits are required. Ball and roller bearings aero and tank engine components arms precision instruments gears and a wide range of small components must be finished by precision grinding High speed tool steels such as tungsten carbide account for some 40 of the total consumption of grinding wheels in Germany.  The production of abrasive wheels is carried out in two stages firstly the manufacture of the abrasive materials and secondly the making of the grinding wheels. The two industries appear to be quite separate as in general  manufacturers of abrasive material do not make grinding wheels and. vice versa.  There is not likely to be any shortage of crude abrasives except possibly alumina where however the demand of this industry requires only a very small proportion of the total output.  There are a large number of manufacturers and before the war the export from Europe was substantial. Experience in this country suggests however that demand is certain to have increased greatly as a result of the war. In the long run supplies of experienced labour and not manufacturing capacity are likely to be the limiting factor. .If however delays and shortages of special types could be caused effects would be great.  There have been reports of local shortage of grinding wheels particularly large wheels of the specially high quality required in the manu facture of ball bearings in France.  There are perhaps 50 manufacturers of grinding wheels on the continent Germany being the most important producer France is also an important producer having large supplies of bauxite high grade silica sand and water power.  2. ABRASIVE RAW MATERIALS The principal raw materials fused alumina and silicon carbide are known under various trade names. The natural counterparts of fused alumina viz. emery and corundum -are unsatisfactory and there is no natural substitute for silicon tarbide. Alumina is used for grinding steel steel alloys and all high tensile materials and silicon carbide is used for cast iron and low tensile materials., SECTION XIV  2. Aluminium oxide or alumina is melted in an electric arc furnace which takes 2-3 000 amps at 100 volts Fig. l whilst silicon carbide is made by heating coke and sand in an electric furnace requiring up to 6 000 amps Fig. 2 . In both cases large quantities of electric power are required and the incoming or generated alternating current must be transformed to the required voltage or converted to D.C.  The resulting material is crushed ground and classified into various sizes at the works and despatched to the grinding wheel manufacturers. The respective processes for the preparation of graded fused alumina and silicon carbide after leaving the furnaces are set out in the flow sheets comprising Figs 3 and 4.. For further information regarding mineral dressing and alumina production see Sections It and VIII respectively.  The particle size of the abrasives varies from 10-100 mesh in grinding wheels and from 120600 mesh in hones. Artificial hones used to finish off the grinding process to the nearest half-thousandth of an inch are mads from much finer abrasive always bonded with vitrified porcelain Belgian hones of natural stone are also used for finishing  ABRASIVE TOEELS.  Wheels are made by bonding together an aggregate of abrasive particles in a matrix composed of a vitreous or a plastic material the mixture being pressed under hydraulic presses dried and fired. Fused alumina constitutes about 78% of the artificial abrasives mads and carborundum or silicon carbide about 20%.  In vitreous wheels which are mainly used in precision grinding the bond consists of up to 30% of a clay material which in some cases may contain dextrine glucose or glycerins in small proportions. The quantity of bond depends on the grade of wheel required and the use to which it is to be put. The usual method is to make a moist mix of the ingredients press this to a wheel shape under an hydraulic press Fig. 5 and dry in a heated room the wheels lying on their sides until sufficiently firm to handle and subsequently being raised on to their circumference. They are then fired in batches in a beehive or bottle type of oven Figs. 6 and 7 in the older process or in a continuous kiln on trolleys in the more modern process Fig 8 . The firing process converts the clay bond into a glass or porcelain which holds the abrasive particles together. The continuous tunnel is heated from below with producer gas and any damage to the producer gas plant will put the plant out of action until the gas sup ly has been reinstated. The beehive ovens are usually fired directly with coal., FIG. 1 -Electric Arc Furnaces for Alumina.  FIG. -Electric Resistance Furnace for Silicon Carbide.  A273, 7 Foa ' mng o o // goto//its s'umiom oio Cntshod by / dgO bsmmor oV6 tosbout /rootmob/ocbs  /So Crutbor to 9 crgr Q'  4by/ on cntshor tot Trommot scrooo  w woi t' M fOQl 0 Mosb ro/ts ° //ummsr sc/soa Dings msgnotrc SOpSftor I 0/t fir / roosting fitmsco Sott/mg jf I tmnbs jJ VW tutor TT '- Mj Dorr c/otsifier to romovo Oust ororf/ow . Dust On / SnO Oit/  OilfiroOOoub/t sbo/tOr/or 6sggot/formsr ot  InOnotion typo Ding  Msgrthcs totMDings-nognotirs FIG. 3 -Flow sheet of crushing grinding and preparation of fused aluxaina. Ou /e tumps from furnace room  1 FIG. 4 Flow sheet of crushing grinding and preparation of fused silicon carbide. A274, , FIG. 8 -Continuous kiln for baking wheels.  A276, -SECTION XIV.  3-   The alternative method generally used for high speed fettling parting and polishing wheels is to use a bakelite type of plastic binder. The wheels are cured in intermittent or semi-continuous ovens at temperatures up to 300° C. Shellac and vulcanised rubber are also used as bonding materials.  In either process hydraulic presses are used working at pressures of from 1 ton to 3 tons per sq. inch of ram area. Different pressures are used according to the area and thickness of the wheel in order to give equivalent density. The pumping machinery is vital to this portion of the plant and cannot be replaced at short notice.  After manufacture all wheels are given a general inspection and are tested for grade and out of balance which is corrected within limits by adding lead.  About 70% of the grinding wheels produced are bonded with vitrified glass.or porcelain and about 30% with plastics or rubber.  ACTION.  A ABRASIVE MANUFACTURE.  The power plant is the vital spot of these factories in view of the large requirement of electrical energy more specifically -the transformers These are usually of special design single phase tapped for voltage regulation. H.E charges should be applied to the transformer tank behind the radiator tubes about one-quarter of the height from the base of the tank and coupled to an incendiary device and wick.  For action against alumina plants see Section VIII.  B. GRINDING WHEELS Without explosives.   . For sabotage there are two objectives   i To produce faulty wheels which will leave the' factory undetected and as such will produce bad work or .be found to be useless.  ii To slow down production. . . . The follov/ing action may bq .taken to produce faulty wheels, SEUTION XIV   i  a Adulterating fine grit with a small quantity of coarse will if carried out in moderation produce wheels which will ruin work but remain undetected for a considerable time .. Only a small quantity of coarse grit is necessary and suitable sizes would be 18 20 l mm. placed in 46 60  f mm or 46 60 in 120 mm. and finer. Alternatively fine grit  i.e. flour will reduce the cutting properties of the wheels if added in reasonable quantities . The addition of rough sand for grit will also reduce the grinding effect.  b The use of an excessive bond material in the mix will produce a wheel which will fire normally but will be too hard to be used for the purpose for which it was intended.  c Substitution of binders. In instances where glycerine or glucose are used the substitution of or dilution with water will produce wheels which are difficult to handle before firing and which after firing would be extremely soft  d Application of the wrong pressure. If in making the wheels a pressure can be applied considerably in excess of that intended e.g. x 4 the resultant wheel will be too hard to be of much use  e Wheels made out of balance badly spreading the mix in the mould or by the insertion of a foreign body in the wheel at the time of pressing may occasion considerable inconvenience to the operator of the machine. In all the above cases the wheels could be despatched from the factory provided that the inspection department was not thorough. The damage would occur in the machine shops in which the wheels were being used. If the inspection department were extremely thorough wheels made as in a are probably the only ones which would be passed.  The items outlined above are by no means the only ways in which bad wheels can be produced they do however occur as the ones least likely to be detected Any particular approach naturally depends on the working conditions of the factory but in general the disobeying-of any instruction is likely to have a detrimental effect on the wheel. It may only be slight such as is caused by applying the pressure to the wheel too rapidly or the effect may be more serious as would result, SECTION XXV.  5. from putting the ingredients in a mixer in the wrong order or allowing a mixing to 'dry before pressing. Such minor sabotage is largely dependent upon the intelligence of the operator.   To slow down production. This can be  divided into two sections   a Damage to wheels necessitating remakes.   b Damage to plant.  a An unfired grinding wheel is a fragile article and no enumeration of the ways of damaging it is necessary. Mass destruction could be caused by under firing a kiln. It is probable that this could not be repeated as it is easily detected but the damage done before discovery might be very considerable. Anyone loose in a drying room with a hammer could destroy a week's work within the compass of a few minutes. The mixing of the wrong bond ingredients will produce useless wheels but this like badly firing kilns is not likely to be repeatable.   b Damage to plant of a major nature such as the complete destruction of a kiln is probably not feasible but considerable inconvenience can be caused through a spanner accidentally dropped in a mixing machine or an hydraulic valve left open. Here again the best procedure is determined by the layout and nature of the factory and the initiative of the operators. With explosives.  Attack hydraulic power plant or accumulators.]