[Mi ARCHIVES  S.o.fe. H 4T   o  FILE NUMBER SUBJECT HISTORY 31A VOL 3 VOLUME FROM 1944 TRAINING STS 103 CANADA Supplementary reading material TO, February 1944  SUPPLEIIENTARY RSADIIG FOLDER  J  FA. 1 Burying of Parachutes. FA. 2 R.C.M.P. Description Forms. FA. 3 Description Aid Chart. FA.4 Factory Organize tion. FA. 5 Anti-Sabotage. FA. 6 Dangers in South America.  FB.l The Third Reich Abroad. FB.2 Vansittartism .  FC.l Intelligence Reports  Invasion of Europe by United Nations FC.2 Operational Prop ga.nda FC.3 The Psychological Warfare Branch . FC.4 Combat Propaganda in the Field. FC.5 War Propaganda in France. FC.6 Russia and Religion. WU7 Twelve Practical Questions on India., FA.l  BURYING OF PARACHUTES  NECESbiJIY EQUIPMENT.  1. Entrenching Tool. Experiments have been made with the ordinary entrenching tool of the spade variety and also of the pick type. It would appear that the best results should be obtained from the use of an instrument similar to the spade carried on M.T. vehicles with a handle about twothirds the normal ength. The advantage of this implement over the ordinary entrenching tool is that it is rather wider which makes it more suitable for being used to shovel loose earth also the cutting edge is V1 shaped which is of great assistance in cutting through roots. 2. Gloves. It has been noticed that a number of students get badly blistered hands in digging in fairly hard ground with a short handled entrenching tool. It is there fore suggested that they should wear a pair of gloves for this work. 3. Knife be supplied since in very heavy ground it is very often simpler to dig two small holes than one large one. In this case the knife is necessary to sever the parachute from the harness and bury them separately and/or possibly to cut the harness.  CTUhL digging.  If one hole is being used the size of hole re quired is approximately 40 long by 24 wide about 16 deep. If the hole is dug in turf a line could be cut across the top of the hole in the turf and across the bottom and cut down the centre then by cutting underneath the turf away from the centre line on both sides two flaps are formed which can be folded back before the actual digging is comm enced. The earth removed from the hole should be piled in as small a space as possible preferably on a piece of sacking. No earth should be thrown away or scattered until the necessary amount of earth has been put back in order to fill up the hole after having inserted the parachute harness jumping uniform boots and crash helmet. Otherwise if earth is scattered beforehand it is very difficult to judge how much will be required to fill up the hole and one is very easily left short. When the hole has been dug the harness should be placed at one end of it and the rolled up para chute at the other the space between the two will take the rolled up uniform and the boots. The crash helmet can then be placed on top of the rolled up parachute. Parachute uniform and boots should not be discarded until the last moment before putting them in the hole. When the necessary amount of earth has been put back in the hole the remaining earth on the sacking should be widely scattered on the ground. It has been proved that no sign of earth scattered in this way can be noticed even in an ordinary field. Alternatively if available throw into deep undergrowth making sure that no large lumps of earth are thus thrown away but broken up before hand. The earth in the hole can then be trodden down by laying the sacking over it and thus avoiding the digger's 'walking shoes becoming unnecessarily muddy. The two flaps of turf can then be folded back on the hole trodden down especially on the lines where the turf has been cut and the grass subsequently brushed over by hand., -2-   A few twigs leaves and dry earth should then be sprink  led over the whole place and the area round about in  cluding the covering of the hole and brushed over with a  small bough or a tree. If the burying takes place in a  wood it is not necessary to cut the turf in the manner  described above as all traces of digging after the earth  has been trodden back can be very effectively covered by  spreading pine needles leaves dead twigs fir cones etc.  or whatever happens to cover the surrounding ground in  question.  SELECTING OF SITES.  The selection of the site for digging a hole is naturally a matter to be decided in accordance with the actual circumstances. Digging in a field the going is gen erally considerably easier but there is a greater chance of discovery owing to the place being more exposed and subse quent risk of ploughing etc. Digging in a forest the going is generally a little more difficult owing to a considerable number of roots which have to be cut. It is however felt that a wood well away from foot-paths in spite of the difficulties in digging since the chance of subsequent dis covery are practically non-existent. In digging near bushes in a wood great attention should be paid to avoid digging too near the bush as newly broken off branches or twigs will show up very plainly in day-light. In the same way when roots have to be cut and removed from the hole great care should be taken in their disposal as these are very tell tale signs.  TIME TAKEN.  Experiments hitherto undertaken in various condi tions of ground have given a minimum time of half an hour and a maximum time of l hours. In all cases experiments were carried out with the greatest care and subsequent searches by members of the staff on one occasion 3- hours in a very small space failed to reveal any signs of the digging.  GENERAL.  Since most of the digging will actually take place by night it is strongly recommended wherever possible that the digger should remain by the site until it is sufficient ly light to make quite certain that all traces have been removed.  ALARM CONDITIONS.  Naturally if by any misfortune the Agent has reason to believe that he has been seen coming down or that after landing the alarm has been raised there will be very little time available and any attempt at burying the para chute on the foregoing lines should be abandoned immediately. The main objective will obviously be to put as much distance between the Agent and his pursuers in the shortest possible time. Therefore the very minimum of time should be devoted to hiding the parachute as this will probably be found in  any case., -3-   The method of disposing of it will be dependent entirely on the nature of the Country in question the direction from which the pursuers are coming and the amount of cover available. The following are however a few examples of likely places v/here a parachute can quickly be conce led -Undergrowth or bracken drains small streams culverts manure heaps hay stacks trodden in to boggy land trodden into deep mud at a cattle crossing in reeds and rushes etc. It is suggested that it will be very often advantageous to cut off the parachute from the harness and hide them separately since for the purpose of ra.pid dis posal they present slightly different problems. For example the parachute itself can be pushed into a rabbit hole and the harness thrown into a ditch with some earth pulled down to cover it.  If as was suggested above the Agent were pro vided with an ordinary sack previously recommended for placing the e rth on and a piece of string all the equiment could be put into the sack with a few large stones and thrown into a pond.  The above are only suggestions as naturally there is an unlimited variety of methods but they are dependent on actual circumstances., FA.2 F. 161 ROYAL CANADIAN MOUNTED POLICE DESCRIPTION FORM  Name and Aliases. 2. Wanted for. 3. Nationality or Race. 4. Colour. 5. 6. Height. 7. 8. Complexion. 9. 10. Hair on face.11. Nose.13. 14. Chin.15. 16. Build.17. 19. Age. Weight. Hair how worn Eyes. Mouth. Teeth. Scars marks....  18. Physicalpeculiarities. 19. Voice accent speech. 20. Languagesspoken. 21. Dress. 22. Appearance carriage. 23.Gait.24. Manner.  Education. 26. Occupation. 27. Criminal occupation andrecord. \ 28.Habits. 29. Photograph if obtainable datetaken. 30.Remarks. 31. Warrant issued and by whom held 32. If located and arrested notify If description telegraphed this form is to be followed. Signature., FA.3  Concave Straight Convex Roman Snub Horizontal Downward IiOBli' Descending Square Medium Qalfed Prominent Mormal Flat, FA.4  FACTORY ORGANIZATION  Chairmen or Governement Department works through The Managing Director who is responsible for seeing that the policy of the Board of Directors is carried out and that departments are working efficiently. There are three main sections under him - A. Chief Engineer. Engineers who are responsible for the general design of products investigation of trouble arising from use of products and for future de velopments. Draughtsmen who form liaison between the engi neers and the workshops. Much of the detail is done in the draughting office. Research Department which is divided into -Pure Research -This is a scientifice department and is interested in future developments and new mater ials . Testing Department is responsible for ensuring that all material to be used in manufacturing is within tolerance . This department may often have a representative in the factory from which special equipment comes. B. Works Manager. Manufacturing Departments -These may be many in & large factory. They are each in charge of a superintendent who has under him a number of fore men. Under each foreman are slingers and charge hands. The latter combine machine operators fitters and labourers. Progress Department or Planning Department -The Department is in charge of a manager who has under him Engineers and Clerks including an expert on machine tools . Their job is to ensure that the materials and parts arrive at the assembly line at the right time. These personnel often wear differ ent coloured overalls to distinguish them. % Inspection Department consists of a number of in spectors in charge of a manager and is responsible for seeing that the workmanship is up to standard. Maintenance Department -In charge of the works Engineer who has fitters machine operators and labourers under him. These men are the only ones who are authorized to move throughout the factory. m Traffic Department consists of the receiving de partment the despatching department with clerks packers and carpenters which is responsible for, -2   packing and despatching goods and determining  the best route by which to send them find the  Internal Traffic Department.  Sales and Finance Side l/c of the Secretary .  Sales Department  Costing Department  Purchasing Department -is responsible for ordering materials asked for by the draughtsmen and also the store-keepers.  Mailing Department -handles both internal and external mail.  Telephone System.  PARTICULAR METHODS OF ATTACK -   Having considered the different departments and personnel usually found in any factory we can now decide which will be the most useful to us. Those particularly able to help in sabotage are shown on the diagram in large letters.  A. Chief Engineer's Department. The Testing Department can insist on the very  highest standard of material or they can pass faulty material.  The Draughtsman can make a mistake in dimen sions. Make a mistake in ordering parts. Fail to send purchasing department's order copy. Specify castings for certain parts.  B. Works Manager. The fitters in the manufacturing department are the only personnel worth considering. They work with their hands and can definitely go slow .  Progress Department is available as a source of information what parts are short etc. . Per sonnel can also fail to get around to all the trouble reported.  Inspection Department can g ct in the same manner as the testing department.  Maintenance Department -the fitters and labour ers in this department have the best opportunity for carrying out acts of sabotage.  Traffic Department -The despatching department can choose the worst route for shipments and can also put small parts in the wrong package. The Internal Traffic Department can assist in slowing down production., o-   C. Sales and Finance Side. The purchasing and mailing departments can be useful by careless handling of orders and im portant letters. It is difficult to pin respon sibility on the personnel of these departments.  In addition to the above it must be noted that each shop has its own stores both for raw mater ials and for finished products.  Labourers can be useful by drawing the wrong tools or material. Sinilarily storekeepers can supply wrong tools and/or material.  From the considerations above it appears that the  most important departments in a factory from our  point of view are -   The Progress Department for obtaining information.  The Maintenance Department for operations., FACTORY ORGANIZATION Chairmen or Government Department  Managing Director Chief Engineer Works Manager Secretary Engineers Research Draughtsmen Sales Dept. Costing Dept. Puichtsing Dent. Jailing Dept. Tel'epht Dept. Pure Research Testing Dept. Stages Manufacturing Progress Inspection Maintenance Traffic Depts. Dept. Dept. Dept. Dept. Departmental Manager Manager Works Engineer Superintendents  Engineers Clerks Inspectors Fitters M/C Labourers Operators Slingers Charge Hands Recei/irg Pespatcning Internal Dept. Dept. Traffic M/C Fitters Labourers Operators Clerks backing Carpenters, ANTI-S.ABOT/1GE  METHODS OF SABOTAGE -   A. Damage to machines or equipment by breakage manipulation abrasives chemicals or foreign bodies. B. Damage to vital machinery equipment or buildings by time bombs gas explosions incendiary bombs and devices or the use of other explosives. C. Damage to power stations transmission lines transfer stations switchboards or other key points of the power system. D. Damage to materials either used or being manufactured at the plant including materials being used for processing and raw materials. E. Damage to precision tools or technical mechanism. F. Damage or delay to finished products both at the plant and in transit. G. Damage to theft of or interference with blue-prints formulae working models or other confidential data. H. Bacterial infection or other pollution of water and food stuffs for the consumption of the employees or foodstuffs being manufactured on contract. I. Injury to Personnel including the introduction of contageous diseases. J. Damage by arson including undue negligence and existing fire hazards. INDUSTRIAL INFOIlu TION SOUGHT BY ESPIOI'hiGL AGENTS -   A. Improved methods of production. B. Type of material being produced. C. Rete of present production and capacity D. Quantity of articles on order by this and other govern ments. E. Specifications formulae and plans of all munitions and war equipment. F. Test records of newly developed munitions air-planes guns torpedoes and other equipment. METHODS OF ESPIONAGE -   A. Infiltration of spies into plants as employees. B. Purchasing information from employees. C. Theft or purchase of stolen plans papers and other confidential documents. D. Copying documents., 2  E. Photographing working models or finished products. F. Reproduction or theft of working models or finished products. G. Questioning employees either openly or under pretext. H. Enticing employees who are particularly familiar with the production of confidential materials to enter the services of a foreign power and serve in an advisory capacity for the production of similar war munitions either in this country or abroad. I. Personal observation of production operations test runs or confidential papers. J. Foreign espionage rings disguised as commercial concerns import-export association scientific organizations businessmen's groups and engineering organizations may attempt to obtain confidential or other information of benefit to a foreign power. K. Pressure and threat with reference to relatives and friends of an employee who reside in a foreign country. PERSONNEL -   Managers should consider the personnel as the most import ant fector in plant protection. Disloyal employees are in a better position to commit sabotage and espionage than a non-employee. Employees ana former employees have a complete working knowledge of the plant fuftctions ana are in poss ession of authentic information which enables them to strike at the vulnerable points of the industry with which they are familiar.  In contrast to these individuals loyal employees may readily assist in protecting the plant properties as well as reporting overtures made to them by foreign agents. It should be considered however that the efficiency of loyal employees performing these patriotic duties is entirely de pendent upon the training that has been afforded them and the instructions they have received.  It is therefore deemed advisable for all plant owners to establish schools so that all employees particularly those in supervisory capacities may receive instructions as to their duties in connection -with the protection of plant properties against foreign-controlled sabotage or espionage.  Foreign agents will make every effort to obtain employment in an important plant or a plant producing confidential  material. Applicants should therefore be carefully investi  gated before actual employment.  Application Forms -   An added precaution against the employment of a foreign  agent is the adoption of a suitable application form. Such  a form should be executed by all present and future employees, 5  c.nd should include the following information  i. The employees full name and present address. ii. The personal history a. Place of birth b. Nationality c. Parents' birthplace d. Wife's maiden name e. Wife's birthplace Women employees who are married should be requested to give  a. Their maiden name b. Their Husband's full name c. Their Husband's birthplace d. Their Husband's employment iii. Names and addresses including immediate relatives of husband or wife. This in formation should specifically include the names and addresses of all members of the employees family who may be residing in foreign countries. iv. Education specifying names of all elementary grade and high schools as well as colleges universities and higher educational institutions attended giving their locations periods of attendance and courses pursued. v. Former employment. This should include a list of all places where the employee formerly worked together with a statement as to the type of work performed the period of employment and the reason for the termination of employ ment. Date and place of any Civil Service employment should also be set out. vi. Military or Naval experience including both domestic and foreign. This should also include information as to the reason for the termination of such service when and where enlisted v/hen and where discharged what branch and serial number of enlistment. vii. The names of all ment service or in the service of any foreign country. viii. Alist of all belonged other than labor unions. ix. A statement as to the employee's whereabouts and activities during the perioa from 1914 to 1918 inclusive. x. The employee's Social Security number xi. At least three references excluding relatives. xii. Identity of the persons giving relationship who should be notified in the case of emergency. xiii. Astatement as arrested and in the event that he has information as to the date place of arrest and the offense charged in cluding the disposition thereof., 4  CHECK OF ABSENTEES -   A check should be me.de each day with respect to each employee who is absent from duty to determine the reasons for his absence or to verify them. Such a check may be conducted in some instances by a telephone call to the employee's home or by personal contact with him or members of his family. Any employee who is absent from the plant without a legitimate excuse should be looked upon with suspicion and a careful investigation should be made to determine his activities during his absence. This isespecially true where the employee is found to have secretly travelled to another city or a foreign country.  MOVEMENTS OF EMPLOYEES WITHIN THE INDUSTRIAL UNITS -   An employee who desires to leave the unit in which he is em ployed for the purpose of visiting another unit for person al or official reasons should secure a pass from his foreman. This pass should reflect the name of the employee and the purpose of his visit to the other unit and should be time stamped indicating the time of departure from the unit to which he is assigned. This pass should be presented to the guard on duty at the entrance of the unit to be visited or if no guard is present to the foreman of the unit. The guard or foreman of the unit being visited should time stamp the pass and return it to the employee when he leaves the unit noting the time of his departure. It should then be returned to the foreman from whom it was originally obtained. He should indicate the time of the employee's return to the unit in v hich he is regularly employed. These passes should be made a matter of permanent record.  REST ROOMS AND CAFETERIAS -   Rest rooms recreation rooms and cafeterias should be so located that it is unnecessary for employees in order to reach them to proceed through areas other than those to  which they are assigned.  LOCKER ROOMS -   Employees should be furnished with locker rooms and re quested to change their clothing and leave their lunch boxes in these rooms. Clothing and lunch boxes should not be permitted to remain in or near important areas of the plant..  EMPLOYEES' ENTRANCES -   Obviously a guard should be on duty at each employees' en trance and should identify the employees when they emter the plant. This may be accomplished most effectively by re  quiring each employee to exhibit his identification card  and badge. In these cases where the guard at the gate may be suspicious of an individual entering he may closely examine the suspect's credentials and if still in doubt communicate  with the personnel office for positive identification.  It is difficult for a single guard to check the credentials of employees entering in more than one line. It is there fore desirable to so construct the entrance gates that the employees must enter single file. If desired provisions, 5  may be made to enable several lines of employees to enter through each gate. If this method is employed separate guards should be assigned to each line.  Employees should be assigned a gate number and should al  ways enter and leave the plant through that gate only.  Checking is also rendered more simple by staggered hours.  PRECISION TOOLS -   Technical and precision tools should receive the utmost protection. The loss or damage of such tools may retard or stop production entirely until the tool has been replaced. Precision tools may also be of interest to a foreign government which may be contemplating the production of similar equipment.  It is therefore suggested that all technical and precision tools be maintained in a separate room or in an all-screened area. This area should be considered as restricted. An attendant should be on duty in the tool room at all times  when such tools are being used and should maintain a de tailed charge-out system. The guard force should consider the tool room as a vulnerable point at such times as an attendant is not on duty thereih.  TELEPHONES -   Employees should be discouraged from receiving other than   emergency personal telephone calls at the plant. Tele phone messages that are unimportant should be transmitted in written form by messenger to the employee. Emergency calls for employees should be receiveo by the employee in his foreman's office.  SAFES -   Small safes that can be carried away should never be used for confidential documents. If small safes are employed they should be encased in a wall or a floor in concrete to prevent the possibility of their removal. A safe door should never be closed if it is to remain unlocked. Keys to inner doors should never remain in the locks.  Locksmiths when working on a safe should be requested to arrange the combination in such a manner that it may be be changed by an official in the plant to a combination that is unknown to the locksmith. When in doubt as to the safety of a combination of a safe the safe should remain empty and open until such time as the combination has been changed.  HANDLING OF MA.IL -   All mail sent from the plant should be handled by one or  two trusted clerks who should be designated to inspect all  outgoing mail before sealing and stamping it. All letters  prepared in the plant should be directed to the mail  clerks for inspection to determine that no improper mater  ial is included in the letter. They should then be placed  in the appropriate envelopes sealed stamped and placed in  mail punches which in turn should be sealed by the mail, clerk c.nd delivered to the Post Office or retained in his custody until Celled for by the Post Office truck.  Incoming mail should be received at the appropriate re ceiving stations which should be located at a point re  moved from any vital area in the plant. When received the mail should be carefully examined and particular attention should be directed to packages received which  may contain material designed to injure the plant. All  mail after having been properly checked in the receiving station should then be delivered to the appropriate offic ials of the plant. Any threatening or suspicious letters received at the plant should be protected to preserve latent fingerprints and should be placed in envelopes by the receiving officials and immediately transmitted to the plant protection official.  DISPOSAL OF bASTEPAPER -   All wastepaper should be collected and disposed of in the plant area by means of an incinerator or sheading machine. Under no circumstances should wastepaper be taken from the plant area to be disposed of or sold as junk. Particular care should be taken during the dispose. of wastepaper from the drafting or photostating rooms where confidential specifications plans or diagrams may be prepared.  JANITORS aUD CHaK .Oi.SU -   The opportunities of janitors and charwomen to obtain con fidential information should not be overlooked. It is to be realized that these employees are in the lower salary brackets and do not require tny special training or ex perience to obtain such employment. It is to be further realized that these employees have access to all depart ments of the plant usually during such times as the re gular employees are not on duty. it is therefore  necessary to instruct the members of the guard force to  make irregular observations of these employees during the course of their duties to remove the possibility of their  obtaining confidential information in the plant and selling or transmitting it to foreign agents. Nothing in this section should be interpreted to mean that because of their positions they should be under greater suspicion than any other group of employees.  IDENTIFICATION BADGES -   Plants adopting a badge system should establish definite rules regulating the use of the badges. These rules should provide for the following  A. That the badge be worn in a uniform place on the outside of . the employee s clothing. B. That all persons wear a badge when within the confines of / the plant property. C. That all visitors be issued a temporary special badge when / entering plant property., -7-   D. That all official and administrative personnel wear badges at such times as they are on the plant property / other than in the Administrative Buildings. E. That all employees and members of the guard force be advised the there are to be no exceptions to these rules and and any person observed in the plant without proper identification irrespective of official rank should be immediately reported to a member of the guard force. F. That employees reporting for work without their badges will be instructed to return to their residences for ' them.  G. That a suitable penalty be inflicted upon any employee losing his badge. H. That all employees are responsible for the enforcement of these rules. IDEhTIFICi.TIOM h-.RDS -   Appropriate identification cards should also be issued to each employee. Identification cards should contain the following information  h. The full name of employee.a 3. Address a C. Brief description consisting of age weight height colour of eyes and colour of hair. D. Photogfiaph E. Signature of the employee F. Signature of the official issuing the identification card.x VISITORS -   Mil persons who are not employed in a plant should be  considered as visitors. This groupe includes utility  repairmen vendors salesmen and other individuals who  may occasionally desire to enter the plant property.  Before a visitor is issued a badge he should be required to execute a form giving the following information.  A. Date'and time of entrance'.- B. Full name C. Address / D. Purpose for entering the plant. E. Person to be interviewed v F. Area of the plant to which he desires admittance. G. Time of exit., -8-   H. An cigreeraent to comply with all rules and regulations. while within the confines of the plant property. These cards should he filed for future reference in  the event that it becomes necessary to conduct an /  investigation relative to the persons who may have  visited a plant on a certain date.  Under no circumstances should a visitor be permitted to  enter a plant unaccompanied. In those cases vdiere an  interview is desired a plant employee should conduct the  visitor to the person to be interviewed. The employee interviewing the visitor should then be responsible for the return of the visitor in a similar manner to the exit.  Visitors should not be permitted to carry cameras into a plant. Such persons may attempt to take photographs of restricted areas or the camera may contain explosives or other damaging materials which the carrier may attempt to deposit at some vulnerable point.  Visitors should not be permitted to carry uninspected packages into the plant. Should it become necessary for salesmen or other persons to enter a plant while in possession of packages these packages should be inspected by an employee prior to the time that a visitor's badge is issued.  Likewise it is not desirable to permit visitors to drive . their own automobiles into a plant. It is suggested that appropriate perking space be provided near the gate leading to the Administration Building where visitors may leave their cars before entering the plant property. DUTIES DUBIKG FILES -   A fire or a fire drill in an industrial factory presents an excellent c.oportunity for espionage and sabotage agents to become active. Guards whose services are not necessary at a fire should remain at their posts of duty and be particularly alert for suspicious occurrences. If buildings ere completely empty during fire drills a sufficient number of guards should remain in the buildings to protect them during the absence of the regular employees.,  DAi'IGERS IK SOUTH AMERICA  ESSENTIAL RAW MkTERIkLS  If the United States is the arsenal of democracy then the  nations of South America are the reservoir of raw materials so vital to the arsenal's operation.  If enemy action prevents delivery of certain strategic raw materials to the United States -and to other United  Nations -it would be only a short time before planes  could no longer be built tanks produced or guns forged.  VENEZUELA ri.ND COLOMBIA  The oil fields of western Venezuela around the Lake of Maracaibo produce 65% of all the South American crude oil   and with the Colombian and Ecuadorean fields 90% . The  Venezuelan crude which produces 100-octane aviation petrol feeds the refinery at .rruba as much as 40 000 tons a day  and to the Curaco refinery 55 000 tons. If that supply  were cut off the United Nations' air strength in Europe  might soon be starved and air-training in the U.S. and  Canada would be seriously restricted. Complete loss of the fields -by invasion or destruction -would be an absolute oil famine for the allies.  Yet those oil fields are vulnerable. One nxis surface  raider could stop production at jiruba or Curaco for many  months the sabotage of po er-stations pipe lines or the tanker-fleet operating from Maracaibo to the refineries  would have the same effect.  The enemy realize the importance of -the area not only for its strategic materials but also for its use as a basis for an attack on the Panama Canal. There have been many reports of German Italian and Japanese activity in the region Some of the authorities in Venezuela and Colombia realize the danger and some of the Axis agents have been  deported. But there may be refuelling bases or at least contact points for enemy submarines and there is real  danger of saboteur parties landing there.  BRITISH AND DUTCH GUI-Ai  Britain's supply of bauxite and 60% of the U.S. supply are derived from these colonies. There is not great danger to the bauxite mines themselves although the wrecking of power plants up the MacKenzie River could disrupt production. The greater clanger lies in shipping one vessel sunk in the mouth of the MacKenzie could block all other shipping -   ECUADOR  The only industrial installation of raw material of great importance in this country is the production of balso  vrood. Sabotage of the balso output would be difficult except through such means as the fomenting of labour trouble or damaging the kilns It is know that some of the balso exporters are pro-Axis in their views., c Zj  PERU  There are several points of danger in this country. The  refinery at Talara produces much of the oil required by  po'-ver-stations in Peru and Chile v/hich in turn serve  irreplaceable mines. The refinery is on the coast  vulnerable by sea or land. Its destruction vould force  the use of tankers which are badly needed elsewhere.  In the Cerro de Pasco area of Central Peru is an important  copper mine and also the Mina Ragra -the only South  American source of vanadium and producer of 45 of the  U.S. requirement. This mine has its own power station its destruction would stop all production. Potential saboteurs have alternative objective there the railway which runs from the mine to Callao and winds through high country over 65 bridges and through 67 tunnels. The Peruvian government is not inclined to assign the large number of troops necessary to guard it adequately and the American owners are unable to establish adequate security measures BOLT\/I.it  Other railways through southern Peru end northern Chile give Bolivia's materials their only outlet to the Pacific  coast and all those railways are vulnerable The Mollendo- Puna line rises to 13 000 feet in deserted country and  serves the head of Lake Titacaca which is connected by another line to LaPa.r-The arica-La Pas railway through Chile also rises to 13 000 feet and has a gradient of one  in IS in one 26-mile stretch which is racked. The line from Antofagasta through Oruro to LaPas runs for many miles through high mountains and desert. For those three chief lines into Bolivia there is a possible alternative  through northern argentine to Rosario but that route adds many thousands of miles to the journey from Bolivia to Worth American end necessitates passage through the dangerous Atlantic and Caribbean. Saboteurs could stop traffic on any or all of those three railways and the enormous quantities of tin wo from tungsten and antimony which they now carry from Bolivia to war plants would be tied up.  The Bolivian tin supply for instance is irreplaceable since the loss of Malaya and the Dutch East Indies 95 of the South American supply is concentrated in the area around Oruro . In the same area two mines produce 50 of the U.S-antimony supply. Worth of LaPaz one district produces 5 of the world's tungsten -half of the U.S. requirements 11 those vital mines depend on electric power and destruction of the two most importance power stations at Bongo and Miguilla would be quite possible.  CHILE  In Chile are copper mines whose products are essential as in other cases the power stations and the railways connecting with them are the danger-points. The plant at Tc opilia within sight of the coast provides power for one mine which produces 50 of all South American copper another at Chanaral provides all the power for  a, a mine v/ftieh produces the . ning 30% Those three  pover plants and their high tension wires over desolate  country arc-easy targets for experienced saboteurs   -RGENTIK-  i-.rgentir/iproduces no raw materials of vital interest apar from foodstuffs. But it is still Britain's butcher shop and the huge cold storage warehouses where meat is stored   would be prime objectives. However as long as President Castillo keeps to his present foreign policy it is unlikely that the axis will take any action to upset it. URUGUAY -JiD PiiFL.GlbiY  Similarly Uruguay and Paraguay can be disregarded as  sources of raw materials.  BRnilL  although Brazil s chief importance to the United Nations is her strategic position she is producing some material which are irreplaceable. About 3o% of the manganese required by the U.S. now comes from the edge of Matto Grosso and this output is being greatly increased. Again in that case power and railways lines are vital points Mina's Ger&es source of mica iiich provides 2 % of U.S. needs is shipped by narrow-gauge railway through desolate country and the mica itself could be destroyed by either fire or water. The mine at Cascabulhos which is the continent s chief source of metallurgical chromium is also served by a narrow-gauge railway. Brazil's rubber industry is also open to sabot age but the chief fangor is after the product has been collected for shipment -..'hen fire or acids could be used or the ship carrying it could be sunk.  In all this question of raw materials railways and power-stations are the most tangible objectives to be attacked and defended. But the relatively intangible danger of labour trouble also must be met. In Peru Chile and Bolivia for instance the mining is done by natives who are underpaid under privileged and under developed and v/ho have been subjected already to agitation. Axis agents -probably in this case Falangist posing as pr .-sts and anti-Yankee -may persuade those natives to reduce the mines' output.  MILITARY ND POLITICAL  To cut off or capture South American supplies Axis  strategy may take various forms direct invasion large  isolated raids internal sabotage or a combination of all three  A large-scale enemy invasion would likely make use of the Brazilian bulge as bridghead. With a foothold on the continent Axis troops could inspire uprisings among all the scattered minority groups. The initial success of such a move its possible consolidation and expansion would depend upon the effectiveness of the Fifth Column in vital areas the reflex actions of the countries  invaded and the reaction of the United States, Brasil probably easier to capture than to defend has  a larger area than the United States with one-third its  population. The country is 60 per cent white 25 per  cent a mixture and 12 percent Negro. Communications  are relatively well established only in the southern  states In the bulge north of Victoria and beyond  provinces are cut off from each other with no lateral  rail connections or roads.  Enemy occupation of one coastal area would cut off Brazilian forces from all reinforcements save by sea and air. The invader would have difficulty moving inland but could direct the operations of a Fifth Column from this base although invasion would unite the ten South American republics on the diplomatic front little military action could be expected Peruvian forces could not get into Brazil through the mountains and the Fifth Column could prevent Argentine troops from making an entry.   Pui/jIL  There is a powerful Fifth Column in Brazil. In the  region of Rio Grande and Santa Cetharina are 900 000  Germans highly organized under Nazi consuls card  Gauleiters. They art too fond of their possessions to  take overt action now. With Nazi troops in the country  and success in sight they would certainly side with the  invader  There are 250 or 300 thousand Japanese around. Sao Paulo  and Santos in the Matto Brosse around Belem at the  mouths of the iunaaon and around danaos the rubber   gathering centre. They are unassimitated in Brazilian  life ell-organized with stores of hidden arms and  fanatics vhos-leaders collaborate with the Germans.  There is also the native Fifth Column and many high  officers and officials known to have w is sympathies.  In Brazil as in the United States enemy aliens are too numerous and of too great importance in the economic  life of the country to be all quarantined Friendly Brazilians can be encouraged to root out the more  important Axis agents and exemplary action against a few might deter the rest from operating. We together with our U.S. colleagues can assist by providing the  Brazilian authorities with more information on which  to act .  i.A.Bf-iQbwY  Paraguay not yet recovered from the Gran Chaco war is  ineredibibly poor. Of a population of one million most are Indian and more than 7-per cent are illiterate. Argentina controls Paraguay s outside communications via  the Parana river. The country is governed by a shaky military dictatorship which is opposed by a number of military cliques. The nation s most competent men are liberals now in exile. There are 60 000 people of German descent 10 000 of whom are recent immigrants. They could form a Fifth Column which would certainly  join the German masses in southern Brasil and northern Argentine ., The self-styled leader of the Soutli Acorioan republics  v'ith the higiiGS ve..itb and literacy per capita anong  her 13 raillien population urgantina has a navy that  equals Brasil1 s -an army of 100 000 first line troops  and 300 000 reservesj and an air force of be.tv cen 250  and 300 planes  The German organisation in Buenos nines issues orders for the whole of South .-qaerica. In the area betveen the Parana and Uruguay Rivers the German population is hetv eon c and tro millions. They have air fields suit able for light planes and it is' reported they have a motorised courier service to call enough fighting men to make up five lightly armed divisions to strategically located Stutzpankte  The four million Italians around Buenos j.ires and on the coast of Bahia Blanc are less v 1.1 organised and more apathetic The Japanese are negligible.  There is a large native Fifth Column of wealthy landormc  in control of Argentina's governing party. Two native  Fascist parties Allan.u do j.c. Juventca u hh 30 000  members end the Unior Nanional j..rgent.1.na vrith 10 000  work closely with the M.S.D.a .  Control of Ric Plata Argentina's most vulnerable spot  could paralyse the country' trade.  URUGUAY  Little and v/eubut strongly pro-Ally with its two million population oi /hich three-quarters live in Montevideo Uruguay has 200 000 Itali-ns Only a few of the very rich ones ho ever are Fascist-minded  The N'.oi l .n to use Uruguay as a bridgehead .'.or a lightning coup since it dominated the 'T.ta River was discovered in .1840 Success in this uv ve would hrve put Germans in control of half the continent But the plan counted on Fifth Column operation and Oiuguay-on authorities hope to a eke its operation impossible by the defeat of the pro-Haui Herreristv. party in the November elections. Greater security ixl be ensured if the pro- Ally Batllista. party is put in power.  chile  With a number of Left Wing Parties including Communists who fa our the allies Chile is still pro-Axis in sentiment second only to the Argentine. The poorly equipped regular 20 000 troops with 200 000 reserves are commanded by pro-German officers. With her long exposed coastline and lack of communications Chile lies open to an enemy raid or invasion.  Of the 200 000 people of German origin 3 000 -well regimented and armed -are ranked as dangerous Nazis The same applies to all of the German population south of Valc.ivic. down to Patagonia. They are known to have numerous refuelling bases for submarines. The situation threatens the Argentine flank in case of an invasion. The best we can hope for at. present without Chilean .vAvernmental co-operation is to expose the country's  leaders., -o-   BOLI'V  A b-ick'/srd ccu.- -try of three r.nd a h .I milliGnSj ISA white notef. for its storehouse of viU-l minerals Bolxv.i is rn luicertain factor. The anny of 10 000 -ath  its reserve of 60 000 has been trrditioneily pro-Gorman. Rcehm Hitler s former friend ae head of the German military mission in the country-for rise years. The German invasion plan wna ooviinetion of Bciivia by air by the formation of the Lloyd Boliviano ..ir Lineconnecting with the Condor line in Brasil and the Lufthansa in Peru. Pursuit of this pi..n a.ve the Germans complete freedom to survey and photogru-.h o.ll .. .ncs and  strategical industrial installations .athough the line was expropriated in May 1941 due to noserlean pressure and the Gorman minister declared non grata  the situation is still unstable. General Toro a Bolivian strong man is reported pro-Gorman and haior Belmonte former Military Attache in Berlin is violently  in favour of the Axis.  The German Fifth Column nu.-.tar-3500 Carmans control 70/6 of the wholesale and retail business They have well organised schools clubs ana hospitals and there are 3 500 German Jewish refugees. Sven though unable  to control the country numerically the Uaoir could ruin  its usefulness to the dixies by the sabotage of mines and v-il.r/ays. ulnJ  Controlled by a ruling class of epunish descent of less  than 500 000 people Peru has total population of  s ven m .. .lions. Of the total 50 per pure Indian who heto the white man 35 per cent are Mestizo only 15 per cent -re pure shite. This republic's Japanese  colony is the second largest in South xutericu it numbers 50 to 80 thousand. The Geracn populatici . nutibers only 2 000-The present government- t-hile protending  to be democratic is a composite of tre or three ruling branches of the ruling a iqtie and is an offshoot of General Benavides' military dictatorship. There are  signs that the Ai Fu. party vhich is b. h..d by the majority of the-people but has been proseribe-d may  soon be reinstated and may even get one or two cabinet posts. In that case Peru will almost certainly declare war ca the .ocis -.  Several present ministers are friends of the Axis and the powerful family of Miro Quesada is defir.itejr total-  itarirn-The Banco Italian controls 50 per cent of the banking business and the German-owned Casa Grande controls 45 per cent of the sugar industry. But the natural wealth of the country and its communications are controlled by C.S. and British companies the Morgan-owned Cerro do Pasco copper mine the Vanadium corporation the International Petroleum controlled by Standard Oil and the British-owned Peruvian Corporation which controls 60 er cent of the railways, The l&rse Japanese population occupies strategic areas alone the coast south of Lina in the boundary territory disputed by Peru and Ecuador Those Japanese ere not adequately controlled by the Peruvians and are regimented by their own embassy Coneertac. uprisings by Japanese Pernors and small shopLeeavers in selected ara .s could disrupt the country within a dc hours.  hCii-DOR  Lven -veaher than its rival and neighbour t-.. the south Ecuadorith its population of b 500 000 and two large citiesj. is 50 per cent pure Inducn ana 40 t-r cent ieesti c. The array of It 000 regulars and 30 000 reserves has be-on strengthened by thio navt-.l end air base established by the U.S. at 0 lines -   The political situation has been confused --tqere have been la presidents since 1951 3ut the pro-American Gale Flawith the help of the couimarider-in-chief of the may. Colonel stucillo nay oust the present incumbent Orroyc del Rio who is weekly pro-mly.  Germans end Italians control most of the smaller business. A tev Axis lenders have been deported but no strong action has bean taken against tn m In general the pro-axis elements are on the defensive and have accompiised no ...ore. than trie fo/aenfcotion of some anti- U S-sentiment.  COLOMBIA  Under the i oiiticul an --..cononic domination of the United States Colombia depends on the goodwill of the United States ana her president Senor Lopes returned from his recent visit to cashington fullu conscious of the necessity of collaboration The country has been used as a test-cube for U.S. foreign policy in Latin America r.nd strong C.U. naval bases have been established in four Caribbean ports. With her nine million people of whoa 20 per cent are white Colombia is comparatively poor in nature resources ecoipaent and leadershipa Houcver her array of 2S 0C is strengthened by the U. S. naval vie air missions  The i-llicsJ blockade along with blacklisting restricted the trade and commerce of the well-entre.nched German colony despite its efforts to survive under the cover of Colombian business hot sw  Pan-a-'ierican . .irac.ys has absorbed the German-controlled airline SCADTA for which the Uaxis had established strategi a lly-placed airfields and imported technical personnel invaluable for 'a Fifth Column uprising. That personnel remains for the most part scattered through out the country and it is believed that the Nazis still control secret airfields which could dominate the Panama Canal German shooting and riding clubs  .assessing motorized eouipment and arms could form a military or Fifth Column organization for an Uprising., -8-   VENEZUELA  Depending upon her oil exports for 90 per cent of her export trade Venezuela leans almost entirely on the U.S.  A foreign minister recently visited Washington and not long after his return there v as a re-shuffle of the Cabinet leaving it with a somewhat more teftish complexion than formerly. However this was probably chiefly for reasons of internal politics and should not necessarily indicate a swing away from the Axis.  The sabotage of three Italian and one German ship which had been interned aroused anti-xxis feeling and active steps have been taken by the national police against Axis agents whose organizations memberships and meeting-places are relatively well-known. In the rural regions the surveillance is not so effective.  The Venezuelan Llanos form a gigantic natural landing field for some four dry months in the year mid-December to mid-April . During the rest of the year they are waterlogged but landings by float planes or flying boats are still possible on the Orinoco and many of its tributaries. The mesas of the States of Anzoategui and llonagas are dry all the year round and need little preparation to form good fields.  The Spanish mission in Caracas which handles the diplomatic affairs of the xis partners is known to be co-operating with the enemy agents not yet repatriated or deported. The Falange and the Spanish members of the Catholic priesthood are engaged in espionage. However there is greater danger in the Hispanidad propaganda with its anti-U.S. and anti-imperialistic prejudices acceptable to the reactionary elements. The difficulty of counteracting this propaganda while still avoiding an attack on the church may be solved by the exposure of individuals -with the hope that higher members of the Church's hierarchy may take action against them.  3. CONCLUSION At present the Fifth Column in South America is basically a  negative passive force. But in case of invasion or a largescale raid it could become active and destructive.  The German plan to penetrate ever deeper into South America with its undeveloped riches of agriculture and minerals will not be relinquished easily. The arrival of German airplanes on the South American continent could herald and set off and up rising among the enemy minorities.  To destroy what the Germans Italians and Japanese have sys tematically built up the Allies must consider themselves on the offensive and put the-'enemy on the defensive south of  Panama. This must be done at once. It is a tactical position of great immediate advantage to us.  A xis agents can be exposed and their usefulness destroyed. Some can even be controlled without their knowledge--and that  would-give our side some measure of control over German  headquarters., -9-   These are twin objectives which we ourselves must reach in conjunction with our American colleagues collaboration wherever possible with the local authorities VJhere such collaboration is not possible we should be cable in some cases to take the lav/ into our ovm hands.  It is not too late yet to win the Battle of South nnerica but it is almost too late. We have neglected that continent too long because we have felt it was too far removed from any possible theatre of war.  If Hitler decides to act on it. South America can become a Second Front--and not one of our choosing., FB.l  THE THIRD REICH ABROAD.  INTRODUCTION -   The picture of the third Reich end its dang  ers would he incomplete if no mention were made  of the Germans of Nationality or hlood who live  and work beyond its ctual bound ries because  these people have b en welded into the largest  Fifth Column organization the world has ever  known.  Volksdeutsche and Reichsdeutsche -   Nazi terminology differentiates between Reischsdeutsche -State Germans -and Volksdeutsche blood Germans. Reichsdeutsche are the citizens of the German State and naturally hold German passports. Volksdeutsche are of German blood or extraction who may have taken on the nationality of the country giving them asylum.  Zentra.le fur Deutschtum in Ausland -Stuttgart  There have always existed both in Germany and abroad cultural and social societies for Volks deutsche -at their inception quite innocuous in character. The number of these societies is very large particularly in the U. S. A. and South America and their purpose is in the first place to keep the German language and culture alive and to look after the welfare of Germans   whether they be Reichsdeutsche or Volksdeutsche. The most important of these organizations is the Volksbund fur das Deutschtum im Ausland -the  V.C.A. -which was started in 1880 and was until 1933 largely unpolitical. The main impact of the work of the V.D.A. is addressed to the educ. tion of Volksdoutsche abroad by giving finan cial backing to German schools and by providing school books maps whole libr. ries and similar gifts. Furthermore foreign students of German extraction are chosen for scholarships in the Reich by the V.D.A. Another organization is the Deutsche Auslandsinstitut -D.A.I. The D.A.I. keeps correspondents and persons of trust in al]. foreign countries and is above all employed in the publication of pam phlets and books suitable for propaganda abroad and with the task of following ail cultural activities of individual Volksdeutsche and Volks deutsche colonies abroad.  The D. A. I. is framed as a research institute subsidized by the Reich while the V.D.A. is officially at least a public organ z tion Liv ing on the contributions of its millions of mem bers school children in Germany are as a matter of course members of the V. D. A. ., From 1935 onwrrds 11 these societies have been either mefged into or controlled by the Zentrale flir Deutschtum im Ausland which is quartered in Stuttgart. As most of the original societies were privately organized the Party kept up the quasi-official character of the Stuttgart offices. The Stuttgart Bureau is however very important and like the Auslandsorganization which we will discuss shortly is under the direct control of  the Deputy F&hrer until his flight Rudolf Kess. There is no evidence that his successor Martin Borman has filled this function. Its connect  ion with the AO is very close as is borne out  by the fact ttr t Ernst Wilhelm Bohle the  Gauleiter of the AO bears the additional title  of Schirmherr von Stuttgart -Protector of Stutt  gart. Stuttgart is called Stadt her Auslands   deutschen as in pe'ce-time the annual gather  ings of Volksdeutsche from abroad were taking  place in this town.  It is obvious that the object of the Stuttgart Bureau is to locate and control Volksdeutsche convert them to National Socialist ideas and turn them into Reichsdeutsche. This can bo achieved either by persuading them to take cut German citizenship or merely by over-running the country they inhabit. Their organisation would previously have helped to undermine the country s resist .nee as happened in Central Europe. Dur ing the hundreds of espionage trials that the Poles held prior to the invasion of their country it was proved that innocently disguised societies run by and for Volksdeutsche were directly contolled by the AO and worked against Poland for Germany in the following ways  i. The V.D.A. vas able to influence the politi cal outlook of pupils of German minority schools abroad by providing these schools with up-todate Nazi school-books and teaching material and has certainly done so under directions from the AO. ii. Furthermore when the V.D.A. arranged for Volksdeutsche Students to come to German Uni versities an eye was certainly kept on the potential suitability for such students in fut ure subversive activities. It is a fact that students played a conspicuous part in the Su deten troubles and later in March 1939. Many of these students had been in the Reich to attend Schulungslager where they were certainly taught a lot of other things apart from Volkskunde. To sum up one could say that the V.D.A. and the  D.A.I. work as recruiting officers among all German societies for the AO., It may be that the activities of the Stuttgart  bureau have been less intense since the annex  ation bj the Germans of the Central European  territories in which were so many Volksdeutsche  but it must not be forgotten that many blood  Germans exist in neutral countries especially  in North and South America.  Volksdeutsche in areas which have been occupied  by German troops without being officially annexed  are not handled by the AO. Either they become  affiliated to the nearest Party unit in Germany  proper or if cultural or administrative autonomy  has been achieved for them Like in Slovak Hun  gary etc. they are handled by Government de   partraents.  The Aurlandsprganizat.  This is by f r the most important body controll ing Germans abroad and is open to German subjects abroad only. It is in fact the N.S.D.A.P. abroad with exactly the same ramifications as at home. Officially and in an overt form it never concerns itself with Volksdeutsche. This of course does not exclude press comment and speeches person'.1 contacts however with Volksdeutsche which are more than merely social ones are offici ally handled by the V.D.A. and similar organizations. Its original name was Auslandsabteilung der Reichsleitung der N.S.D.A.P.some enthusiastic members of the Party who had been born abroad being its creators. It was located in Hamburg and had in 1933 only three employees but it had the backing of the Party bosses and the strengthening of their power increased its prestige until in March 1935 it moved to Berlin the number of employees having increased to 170. The whole organization was raised to the status of a Gau Thus it can be said that whilst Greater Germany the pre-war Ger many had those of the annexed territories which have been incorporated into Germany proper i.e.  not Poland Czechoslovakia and not yet Alsace Lorraine is divided in 42 Gnue there is a 43rd  covering all the vest of the world.  In the course of time the powers of this bureau derived from its successes for example there is little doubt that it was through the information and advice tendered by rhis organization that Hitler felt himself able to over-rule' the advice of the traditional bodies such as the General Staff and the Foreign Office in such actions as the occupation of the Rheinland increased to such an extent that they led in January 1337 to its inclusion in the Foreign Office with a staff of some 700. The order signed by Hitler himself road as follows .,  4   i. For the unified surveillance of Reichs Germans abroad a Chief of the AO will be established in the Foreigh Office to whom will be transferred both the direction and adminis tration of all matters concerning Reichs Ger mans abroad. ii. The Director of the AD of the N.S.D.A.P. Gauleiter Ernst Wilhelm Bohle is created Chief of the AO of the Foreign Office. He will be personally and directly responsible to the Minister of Foreign Affairs. His sphere of activity as Director of the AO of the N.S.D.A.P. and as such his responsibility to the Deputy Ftihrer remain unchanged. He will bear the official title of Chief of the AO in the Foreign Office. iii. T will take part in cabinet meetings which touch his field of activity. iv. The Minister for Foreign Affairs in agree ment with the Deputy Fuhrer will issue the de tailed instructions necessary for carrying out this decree. This law it will be seen gives perfect diplo matic cover nd saw the end of any pretence at retaining the integrity of deplom tic privilege and any restraint as to its use.  In point of fact the AO no'ver moved into the Foreign Office. Its office then as now was in Berlin W. 35 Tierg .rtenstrasse 3/4. Nor did the Foreign Minister at that time von Neurath have any control over it the direct responsibil ity to the Deputy Flihrer making the AO virtually independent from the Foreign Office.  The use of the term diplomatic cover should not mislead. The AO is not a secret society. Its activities are only veiled when the members are working to overthrow the regime of the country concerned. Nor is diplomatic immunity always assured. When in September of last year the committee investigating anti-Argentine .activities investigated the question of Gottfried Sandstede he claimed immunity as press attache but his claim was refuted on the grounds that he was also employed by the B. A. shipping company.  Ernst Wilhelm Bohle.  The leading creative spirit is the above-named  gentleman. Indeed the AO is often known ns the Organization Bohle. The following is what is known of his life it is net uninstruetive. Born on the 28th July 1S03 in Bradford Eng-   1 A IIII e  Educated until matriculation in Cape Town., -5-   University Student in Berlin. From 1923 to 1933 in lo.rge export undertakings  in H'.mburg and the Rheinland having opened his ovm business in the middle of 1950. In 1931 he was working in the organization der.ling with South and South West Africa and later North America.  In 1933 he became the head of the AO and a mem ber of the Reichstag.  The Administration of the AO.  K. Q. -Berlin. Chief -Bohie Deputy Chief -Alfred Hess Brother of Rudolf Chief of Staff -B. Ruberg who is at the same time Chief of the Labour Front Organization in the AO. The following are selected from the 16 depart ments into which Berlin Headquarters is organized  Rechtsamt.-deals with matters of party discip line questions of nationality and questions aris ing in connection with the preformance of mili tary and labour service by Gorman nationals abroad.  Inspektionsamt -deals with such changes of administr tion ..s changes in the form of uniform the issue of fl gs to Ortsgruppen etc. It has also since 1st. Feb. 1937 taken over the duties of the Hafendienstamt a branch of the Auslands Orgnniz. tion whose work seems 1 .rgeiy to consist in making enquiries regarding Germans whose where abouts abroad are unknown and on occasions warn ing the Party organization in the various countries against these individuals should they turn up there. It works in close contact with the Gestapo.  Personalamt -seems to be concerned with collect  ing dossiers for Germans abroad.  ti  Amt fur Beamte -controls German officials abroad.  Schulungsamt -works in conjunction with the Anglo  German Academic Bureau in such matters as the or  ganization of holiday courses for foreigners in Germany. It also deals with the distribution of National Socialist literature to Party organiz  ations abroad.  Landoramt VIl -deals with such matters as the  teaching of the German language in South America.  The HQ has direct liaison with the head offices of all branches of the State and Party such as the Wehrmacht Gesta.po SS and all the affiliated for mations run by the Party such as the Labour Front Physicians League Lawyers League etc . '   which also exist inside the AO organization, , -7   i. North r.nd East Europe ii. V/est Europe excluding England and Ireland. iii. S iv. Italy Switzerland and Hungary v. Africa vi. North America vii. L vijiFar East England Ireland & Australia. It will he noticed that there is no territorial bureau dealing with Russia. It is possible that this comes entirely within the province of Rosen berg .  Landesgrupoen. The most important unit in a foreign country is the Landesgruppe. Each unit has a chief who has a central staff. An arbiter is appointed to ensure that the whole staff and agents throughout the country are under discip line. The Arbiter is therefore linked with the Gestapo since discipline is enforced by person al terrorization economic pressure and pressure on relations in Germany and abroad. The central staff besides the arbiter includes the Adjutant Trer.surer Secretary and permanent Under-Secretaty. Belov/ the central staff specialized or sub bureaux exist such as the Foreign Political Re presentative Leader of Political Education Press Supervisor 8e faring Supervisor Hitler Youth Commissioner Gunner Sports Group .nd Film Re presentative Labour Front Organizer Commissioner for Female counterpart of Hitler Youth Organizat ion Representative of N.S. Welfare and Winter Organization Representative of J. S. War Victims Organization.  Subsidi/ry groups are formed operating under the Landesgruppe in different parts of the country. These groups are known as Ortsgruppen and Stiidzpunkte. The composition of each subsidiary group depends on the importance of any particular subject in each locality for instance in Eng land the Ealing .Ortsgruppe was for Dalston also an Ortsgruppe -but without an Education Leader and a Labour Front Organizer.  As a result of the executive nd co-ordinating functions of the Landesgr.uppe an offensive or ganization is then built up in each country as far as possible. The f. ct that affiliated organiz ations covering the various trades professions and walks of life have been set up within the framework of the AO has been very helpful to the Nazis. Thus it has been possible for them to select specialists and under threat of what will happen to their relatives in Germany if they do not obey orders to send them to Germany for special training in organising and carrying out subversive activities. They are then sent back to the country concerned to train locally other agents and carry out the jobs detailed to them., -8-   This organization provides for attack by every weapon possible including every form of propa ganda financing and in othet ways assisting  the subversive minorities societies and the press and providing and placing the fighting element or Fifth Column designed to co-operate when the time comes with the fighting services.  Uniforms.-Members and functionaries of the AO wear ordinary - arty uniforms and only distinction  being a black diamond-shaped tab on the left arm below the elbow with the inscription ''AO' in white  Di\''lomatic Service -Officially there is a strict separation of the set-ups of Party and State re presentations in foreign countries in so far as the personnel is concerned. Thus it would for in stance be impossible for an Ambassador or Minister to be at the same time Lendesgruppenleiter of the AO. On the other hand the Consuls are not in frequently Ortsgruppenleiter in their districts the most notorious case in the past having been Neubacher former German Consul General in Bel grade and Landeskreisleiter of the AO.  Amt-Se fahrt. -This is the organization controll ing secmen etc. The Amt-Secfahrt is the only Party organization for all German seafaring people Thus members of the Gernicn Merchant Navy are not affilleted to the Party organizations in the dis tricts where they live but to the AO. The same applies to their families and special administrat ive districts Jnave been set up inside the Party ad ministrction covering those coastal areas from which the majority of the German sailors are recruited.  The purpose of this rather curious order of things is two-fold -   I. The control over German Merchant seamen is much closer this way which is of particular importance with regard to their disciplinary and political behavious when they are abroad. II. The second purpose was of course the se lection of suitable individuals for spying con tacts with agents and conveying of highly secret things like codes explosives etc. Merchant sea men are a very good choice for this type of work as was strikingly proved by the famous spy trials in the U.S.A. when it was revealed that personnel of well-known German liners had been used for such purposes. Organization -H.Q. in Berlin in close liaison with the AO. H.Q. controls four Abschnitte, -9   i. Weser-Ems Bremen . ii. Elbe Hamburg iii. Westlc. Ostsee Kiel iv. Oestle. Ostsee Stettin . Eight Lc.ndesr.mter Nos. 1-8 control the rest of world. These Lnndsr.mter control 1 200 .imtstellen distributed in all the large seaports of the world. Bordstutzpunkte are found on board all ships carrying the Nazi flag. There are 70 000 signed seafaring members of the Amt-Seefniirt., FB.2   VANSITTkRTISM  Too often misquoted irresponsibly Vansittart in fact says .  /  1. 75 of the Germans have for 75 years been eager for any assault on their neighbours. 2. This instinctive militarism must be brought to an end anc by force. The end must be final but it need not be barbarous.  bote It is difficult to assess from a reading of his work whether the use of must and need. is accidental or an attempt to pass the buck to the Allied Conscience or a purposive nuance  Var.si ttcrt elaborates his programme for the compulsory termination of German militarism by advocating  1. Be-edueation. Much of their own tastes and nature they can and must change for themselves. The rest will have to be done for them and done by compulsion net by brutality. Zou cannot educate by brutality. Only Germans have thought so and in this too I am eti-German.   . Un .ir teral disarmament as promised by Article 8 of the at'aroic Charter coupled with  a .  b . industry. as advocated by Churchill and Roosevelt.  Vans Mart believes that to implement efficiently the objectives under B. the Allies'must first  1. Dismiss the Myth of the two Germanys -i.e. that repeated and sustained wars of aggression are made by the Germans in the teeth of hostile or reluctant German sic majorities. 2. Dismiss the idee that by attacking Germany propagand istically as an entirely wicked entity we shall further unite the Germans under Hitler. The Germans are already united under Hitler. German unity is greater than it was after the same period of warfare under the Kaiser.  bote P.W.E. German propaganda has frequently postulated a good and a bad Germany.  Ir would be safe to assume that the themes listed under C.  re alone responsible for the cleavage between Vansittartism and Allied Policy. The cleavage between Allied Policy and Vrnsittcrt's irresponsible misquoters is of course more precipitous and less worthy of discussion., F.C. 1 February 1944 IriTELLIGENCE REPORTS INVASION OF EUROPE 51 UNITED NATIONS An important operational campaign in our current propaganda to loyal civilians in occupied countries consists in encouraging them to gather intelligence profitable to the Allied Forces on D-Day.  At a time when it is vital to preserve intact the underground elements throughout occupied territory this campaign has the double virtue of being  a .Useful to the Allies. b .Comparatively safe for the exponent.  2. TYPES OF INFORMATION. The types of military information likely to be-of the greatest value and which cover the above are the following  a . Concentrations of all kinds  m. Unusual volume of movement. c .General indications. a . Concentrations.  i . Troops. Where billeted or camped. Approximcte quantities -s.g. how many divisions. Any identification marks. Weapons and special equipment -e.g. light tanks gas cylinders flame throwers smoke etc.  ii .i trcrrft end Approximate quantities and types if possible. Aerodromes being used. Indication of where petrol is stored.  iii . Artillery. Types -e.g. long-range A.A. etc. -and quantities. Locations.  iv .Dumr s nd Stores and petrol.  v . Any H.Q. of larae formations -if possible which.  b . i.iovement and Transport.  i . Rallwf ys. Which railway lines are unusually active. Which marshalling yards or sidings are unusually full  ii Roads. Unusual activity on roads. j-.ny main roads reserved for military traffic  iii . Sea Transport. Where boats barges etc. are concentrated. Approximate quantities and types. Activities of enemy naval -units.  c AGeneral.  i . Cancellation of soldiers' leave desertions etc. ii . Evacuation of civilians. iii . Any special security measures -e.g. restrictions on movement ..etc.   Any information under the above headings may be of the utmost importance however trivial it may seem -i.e., F.C. P ge - February 1944. it ur.y fit into the ji sc.v puzzle of the intolli oncG pictur .r may confirm a f act already reported but hitherto doubtful.  3. MFMER OF OBTAIHING IhFORMATION. See A.3n Informant Service plizs observation especially at  railway stations ports roads etc.  4. EfNITER OF TRANSIilTTING INFORMATION.  Many reports arrive too late and even more are never sent at all. The three main attributes of all good intelligence reports are that they should be  a timely b . accurate and c . detailed.  a .Timely. A brief but early report is of more value than a fuller one later. Remember that the urgency of this information may be a matter of hours at the outset.  b .Accurate. Report what was seen not what was imagined or mere hearsay. If you are uncertain say so never guesstimate . If you do you will leave the recipient under the impression that your assumption is a confirmed fact.  Time date and place of incident forming item in report  must be accurately given.  c .Detailed. Vague information is not of very much use. We want the facts so report all the facts relating to the news you are giving even if you do not understand them yourself.  Give source if possible. Degree of reliability must always be given. State to whom else the information has been given.  5. CONCLUSION. Before writing your report repeat to yourself When Where  Who What Then having written your report read it through putting yourself in the place of the recipient and see if everything you have written is clear and to the point. Above  all avoid unnecessary padding., FC.2  0P ERATigNAL PR0P AGA NDA  I -Its nature  II -The need for it  PART I  Operational propaganda is the job of agents in the field -it is not a matter of vague talk or loose ideas it is practical work and the fact that the training appears partly theoretical should not obscure this fact. A more detailed definition is given in Appendix A. attached to this paper.  The nature of operational propaganda -ana w. talents it calls for -can best be illustrated in specific terms  The first task of the operator is obviously to organize to some he is in the position of a wholesaler who has to supply and enthuse within his saw a number of retailers but what he has to sell is not just indefinite pro- British or anti-German sentiment -on the contrary he has to secure paying results in some such terns as the following   1 The organization of mutual aid to make it S transfer to Germany -probably on a contributory basis.  2 The setting up of patriotic black markets by which German manipulation of rations can be countered.  3 The control and disposition of farm produce in such a way as to reduce the effectiveness of German requisitioning.  4 Staging actual performances of passive resistance and Go Slow -as distinct from merely talking about it.  5  To take a specific territory The wrecking in Denmark of Germany's attempt to make there a Demonstration Model of the New Order. Steps towards such results will be of such a nature as   a Reviving covertly the activity of Trades Union organizations.  b Reconciling differences in religion and party piolitics.  c Modifying -or eliminating -undisciplined local propaganda that is making for disunity E.g. over Communism .  d Indoctrinating Youth Movements. It is insefar as work of this kind calls for widespread co-operation that propaganda technique is needed. More people have tc be contacted and persuaded than it is physically possible to talk to and far more then can be reached personally with security. For example suppose it is desired to attack a particular collaborationist newspaper. It is first necessary to influence printing operatives office .staff and editorial personnel -each with appropri ate separate means -in order to antagonize the workers against its policy. It is next necessary tc attack the editor perhaps even with scurrility and perhaps by persecution of an unpleasant but not necessarily a violent kind.  In such an operation the printed word makes the necessary contacts possibles  to use the printed word efficiently calls for the specific skill and devices  of provpigr.ndE. technique.  The fact that these devices also serve what may appear to be mere talk does not invalidate them 'for positive o. rational work., Page -2  PART II  Operational propaganda is needed because it is part of the general resistance  to Germany. Its specific importance in the general resistance is increasing  for the following reasons   1 Radio audiences for British news in Occupied Countries are reported to be shrinking. There is bound to be a tendency in this direction because of  a increasing repression.  b gradual wearing out of sets and shortage of replacement parts.  2 Leaflets dropped by the R.A.F. are limited in effectiveness by  a limited numbers.  b v/astage.  c limitations of flying operations.  d the habit people have shown of keeping the . instead of circulating them.  3 Repression together with delays in successful ailitnry action by the Allies will tend tc reduce spontaneous propagaida effort in the occupied countries and therefore inspired effort will ns all the more necessary.  4 Above all it seems vise to consider the time who\ communications may be worse than now -when even the B.B.C. rogrommes icy be interrupted. Under the best of conditions local organisation helps enormously to apply  energies emanating from remote centre. Under adverse cenditions local self  starting organizations may xell be the only forces on whici we can rely. For  the most important reason it seems vital to build'uj a loccl organization which  can evoke organize and direct resistance.  It is. in fact arguable tha-. ororational ..ropaaanda specific local activity to got tvnaible results carried out by .aunts in the field the most imi.ortant element in Political Warfare, APPENDIX A  THE MEA llINGS OF PR0PAGA IIDA  Considerable confusion exists because almost everybody has his cwr. definition  of this word. The nearest thing to an umbrella definition would probably be   A kind of wordy guff dependent cn end more or less related to the news 5.  This is an unfair arid limited definition of what might more strictly bo class-5 fied as background propaganda -the activity which consists in tne generri. maintenance of prestige for a country or for a point of viev. But. cron in connection with this kind of propaganda it should be I'emembered that much c u. be achieved without the aid of favourable events. Cf. The record of Meci propaganda in its early days.  The chief misconceptions about this kind of ropagsr.de. arise from. tat. fact  its raw material is so widely spread -in the press a Jhc radio etc h. .  to regard News and ' Propaganda11 as synonymcus is like confusiry be-uzt e u.t  aluminium -the one is merely one trclific source of the othei . fhc-B.b.C. Home News is not propaganda even though it contains r. propaganda el ment  the 33 3. 3. Foreign News Services aro net propaganda although they contain an  even stronger propaganda element and are directed with propaganda aims.  But leaving this rather academic though important aspect there is another  kind of propaganda the distinctive nature of which has always been ciccrlr  stated in cur training. This other kind is usually defined as operaticaal.  proy.agrncl Tho chief difference ic that whereas background propaganda  primarily at reducing c state of mind cyer.-itional T'Oi.oi.o ar ...v.i sets ios'd./'  to produce specific action.  It is with this kind of propaganda that we are primarily concerned especisll in its advanced training and in its plans for Bonding events into too fielf A good definition cf operational propaganda is The use of ois ision. oiid demonstration in an ars i.od wa.-'-. to produce . redetercdnftd action.  Because of its nature operational .propaganda requires much of -the same  technical skill as background propaganda -the teennique of pir pesive vrriting a knowledge of methods of reproduction and distribution --end above aJl-tlio  skill of planning according to local conditionsmany of which are intanglilo tliough of dominant importance., PC.  ALLIED FORCE HEADQUARTERS PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE BRANCH Information and Censorship Section  2 September 1943. TO ALL CONCERNED WITH PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE  The most recent directive for psychological warfare is contained in a Staff memorandum of AFHQ dated July 1 1943. This directive issued by order of General Eisenhower specifies that the Psychological Warfare Branch will  a .Collect and evaluate information psychological warfare lines.  b .Plan prepare produce and disseminate propaganda.  c .Require facilities from other dissemination of its propaganda material.  d .Work in close co-operation with of combat propaganda.  This booklet is a general summary of the methods operation and work of Psychological Warfare. It is hoped it may help to explain what Psychological Warfare is and how it operates.  C. B. HAZELTINE Colonel U.S.A. Commanding PW3. Remember Napoleon's Maxims One of them says   Morale is to the physical as three to one.  Soldj.ers have always paid lip service to this important maxim but have only considered it as it affected their own troops. For some reason they have never given much thought to applying the maxim as a weapon for attacking the enemy's morale.  Such a weapon has now been perfected and an organization to use it.  It is called the Psychological Warfare Branch PWB which is p rt of Allied Force Heodqucrters.  Its job is to attack the enemy's morale.-his will to fight to soften him up and make him easier to beat in the field.  AUTHORITY.  On July 1st 1943 by command of General Eisenhower a staff memorandum was issued to clarify the activities of the Psycho logical Warfare Branch and to co-ordinate them with all  concerned. Extracts follow, Pr.ge 2  OPGAIJIZi-.TION unc ACTIVITIES -PSYCHOLOGICAL W RP RS.   The following is published to clrrify the activities of Psychological Warfare and to co-ordinate them with nil concerned  1. MISSION The mission of the Psychological Warfare Branch under the Information and Censorship Section is the collection preparation supply distribution and control of all propaganda originating within the theater of operations of this headquarters. 2. OBJECTIVE The primary objective of this Branch is to undermine the enemy's will to resist demoralize his forces and sustain the morale of our supporters a .In the combat area. b .In enemy and enemy-c .In areas occupied  3. OPERATIONS To this end the Psychological Warfare Branch will a .Collect and evaluate Psychological Warfare lines. b .Plan prepare produce propaganda. c .Require facilities the dissemination of its propaganda material. d .Work in close co-matters of combat propaganda o . Continue its activities before during and after an operation.  4. ORGANIZATION Under the Information and Censorship Section the Psycho logical Warfare Branch amalgamates the activities performed by Office of War Information Political Warfare Executive Ministry of Information and part of Office of Strategic Services. Psychological Warfare Branch is organized along the following lines a .'Executive Executive tration direction and control.  b .Planning Planning ganda plans and directives in accordance with the announced policies.  c .Information Information Psychological Warfare intelligence in collaboration with other information gathering agencies.  e .Propaganda Propaganda tributes all propaganda in accordance with the afore mentioned plans and directives.  5. CO-ORDINATION The Psychological Warfare Branch will co-ordinate the Office of War Information -Political Warfare Executive joint propaganda directives with the plans of the theatre as directed by the Commander-In-Chief of the Allied Force. On the tactical level all Psychological Warfare Branch detachments in the field or on special missions will be attached to the headquarters of the unit in 'whose area they are serving and will be for the support of the area commander. The general propaganda policy however and the attachment or relief of these detachments will be controlled by AFHQ., Pr.ge 6. Whenever propaganda is desired by any agency or force under this headquarters the Psychological Warfare Branch will be contacted and a request for or suggestions will be made as to the type or line of propaganda desired. The Psycho logical Warfare Branch will in confornity with its direct ives prepare and arrange for distribution of all approved propaganda. WHrT IS PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE  There has always been psychological warfare -as long as men have made wars.  When a general used armored elephants for the first tine in battle the effect on the enemy s morale was a far more import ant factor in the outcome than the military contribution of  the beasts.  The enemy just up and ran even before he knew what the armored elephants could do to him.  That was a form of psychological warfare.  And when other tribes heard about the elephants they got scared. And when they themselves came up against the elephants they were as good as licked before they started.  That was psychological warfare.  In fact anything that makes the enemy less confident in himself his army his government or the cause he fights for is psychological warfare.  The fire power of psychological warfare is propaganda. Propa ganda is the result of . thorough study of what a particular enemy is thinking and what new ideas will affect that thinking. The aim is to make him easier to beat on the field of battle.  THE WEAPONS OP PBYChOLOGKh.L WAPFaltE.  The two main weapons of propaganda are leaflets and radio. Both can be and are used in two ways.  One is as a tactical weapon close t-the enemy in the field.  It aims to bring about an immediate objective -such as the  surrender of a particular group of enemy troops.  The other is as a strategic weapon lung range from a rear  base. This type of assault aims to weaken the enemy's home morale or the productivity of his war industries.  HOW C0-MB..T PR0 Gi.HDA WOFKS.  First tactical or combat propaganda.  Tactical propaganda is conducted in forward areas by PWB combat teams. These teams have three functions.  One is to maintain close liaison with the commander of the force to which they are attached. By following his plans they  co-ordinate their propaganda assault on the enemy with the physical attacks.  The second is to get the latest front line Intelligence about the enemy. Much of this comes from prisoners who can tell what the enemy troops on the other side of the ridge are thinking whether they feel discouraged or wnether their morale is good.  From information of this kind PWB team leaders can decide what kind of propaganda will have effect., Page 4  The third function is the actual spreading of propaganda to the enemy -propaganda which is based on the best information that can be gotten about his psychological position. It is like the development of a physical attack on the enemy after you havelearned all you can about the strength of his physical position.  HOW THE PAPERS ARE DELIVERED.  Leaflets for front line operation are written on the basis of latest intelligence and printed on small portable presses.  These leaflets are then distributed among the enemy by three methods.  The Tactical i.ir Force drops then in bundles which are packed so that they mushroom open and scatter oyer the area. This is a pretty halter skelter method however' when you want to cover only a relatively snail battle area.  Another method is by hand through agents or night patrols. They leave leaflets like calling cards in sectors where the enemy is likely to pick then up.  The most accurate and successful method of front line distri bution of leaflets is by artillery shell. Distribution by leaflet shells from field -guns can hit enemy units 8 miles away. Leaflet shells from mortars or adapted rifle grenades have been perfected for closer ranges.  THEY DID IT IN THE LAST W- L TOO.  Leaflet shells were first developed for French 75s in 1918. It was then on July 15th to be exact at the height of the   battle for the morale of the German Amy that General Ludendorff wrote   The Army was drenched with enemy propaganda publications. Their great danger to us was clearly recognized. The Supreme Command offerred rewards for such as were handed over to us but we could net prevent them from poisoning the heart of our  soldiers.  In North Africa in this war the method of distributing leaf lets by artillery shell was rediscovered by the initiative of a captain attached to PWB AFHQ. He adapted the British 25-pounder smoke shell to carry and discharge 800 to 1500. leaflets per shell on r target of 150 yards area at 13 000 yards range.  The shell-burst is set for 300-400 feet up to windward of the target. Shells used at night generally insure that the leaf lets will be picked up by enemy soldiers before their officers  can operate counter-measures. Shells used by day are also likely to have fair Effect.  The great advantage of leaflet shells is just this alert  combat propaganda officers can devise leaflets from last-minute  intelligence during battle and land the leaflets directly on  enemy units to which the leaflets are addressed.  TALKING TO THE ENEMY.  Use of the radio in combat areas is much the same as front-line leaflet distribution. PWB combat teams ' are equipped with mobile radio units. With these voices they speak across the lines to enemy signal operators who being human beings usually can be counted on to pass along the word of what  they've heard.  Front line mobile units also are equipped with loud-speaker systems which shout messages across the lines., Page -5  \  HITTING THE ENEMY AT HOME.  Nov/ about Strategic propaganda.  While the Tactical Air Force is helping ground troops advance  the Strategic i ir Force has been bombing enemy industrial areas  communication lines etc. The aim is to slow up his total  effort in the war.  Strategic propaganda tries to do the same thing.  Again leaflets and radio are the main weapons. Instead of  being aimed at specific bodies of enemy troops strategic leaf  lets usually are aimed behind the lines. They attack the  enemy's home country or his source of those supplies without which he cannot continue to fight.  Just as strategic bombing of enemy industrial plants aims to cut down the enemy's supply of munitions the strategic leaflet attacks the morale of the enemy industrial workers or other parts of the home population to make them put less heart in their work and thereby produce fewer weapons of war.  IT ISN'T LiAGIC.  No single leaflet raid can do this. A leaflet offensive is  planned as a war of attrition. It rains on the enemy until it  bogs his war spirit.  The same is true of the strategic radio assault. No single  broadcast to the enemy is likely to break his spirit either at home or at the front.  But the continual impact of fa ctual information about the enemy's faltering effort in the war combined with the growing  picture of our side's strength can and does have an eventual positive effect.  And that effect overall can add up to meaning that the enemy will make just that little less than utmost effort. It can be  the difference between winning and losing wars.  In the case of enemy-occupied countries the leaflet and radio campaigns aim to keep alive the spirit of resistance to the enemy in people in whom that spirit has every reason to languish.  THE MOP-UP.  The third major branch of the work of PWB takes place in areas already occupied by our forces.  After the troops have occupied an area a PWB team comes up from  the rear base to take over the work begun by the combat team which probably entered the area with the first troops.  The job of this second team is to help Allied occupation authorities restore the area to normal life. Using the local radio posters movies newspapers and the like this team assures the local population that the Allied armies have come as liberators and that the principles for which those armies fight are pretty much what average people everywhere believe in when they are not being pushed around by dictators of one kind or another.  IT ALL WORKS TOGETHER.  In brief then this is the way PWB works.  First there is a long-range propaganda barrage by leaflets and radio from the rear., Page -6  Then when the long-range barrage has softened up the eneray  the advance begins. The ground forces move up covered by the  long-range propaganda which must be co-ordinated with the  ground advance.  When contact with the enemy has been made the direct fire  phase begins. Leaflets are fired at a specific unit of the  enemy by the leaflet shell. Leaflets are infiltrated into the  enemy lines by patrols. The front-line mobile radio trans mitters swing into action.  Finally v/hen the objective has been taken the occupation  forces move in and take over leaving the combat teams free  to make the next advance.  Meanwhile some of the long-range propaganda artillery has moved up. In this case the new long-range positions are the new captured bases where leaflets can be printed in large  quantities and delivered to the air forces and where a radio  transmitter v/hich has fallen into our hands can. now be turned  against the enemy.  LISTENING TO THE ShELIY.  One branch of PWB about which nothing has been said up to now  is the Monitoring Section. It is a very important factor in  the conduct of psychological warfare.  The Monitoring Section listens in to the enemy's radio to  find out what he is saying -what he is saying to his own  people to the people of the occupied countries to the people  of neutral countries.  Every day 24 hours a day the enemy is using his dozens of radio transmitters to try to put over his ideas. It is very  important to our side to know v/hat he is saying because from  that you can tell -more often than not -what he is thinking.  Members of the Monitoring Section of PWB must know many langu ages. Among then they must know all the languages in which the  enemy broadcasts. By putting together what the enemy says to his own people with what he is saying for instance to the  people of France you can-often find the pattern of his  thinking. And when you have found that you have gone a long way toward finding the weak spot in his line of psychological defenses.  The report of the Monitoring Section is studied daily not only  by the propaganda sections of PWB but by general officers of AFHQ as well.  And when PWB combat teams move forward experienced monitors go along attached to various unit headquarters to provide the same service as they do at the base to front-line PWB teams and Army commanders.  WHAT OBJECTIONS TO LEAFLETS  Criticisms are customarily heard at the start of a leaflet offensive. Experience is the answer.  The following criticisms are from the last war. They will be recognised as being heard today word for word. These comments are quoted from G-2 reports of 1918.  Comment The pilots detest these papers they prefer to drop pamphlets that explode., Page -7  To explode enemy soldiers illusions is as necessary a part of war as is blowing up their trenches or railheads. A sample of  effects is contained in the following excerpt from the  interrogation of a German officer   I can only talk as a soldier at the front but there its   propaganda effects were disastrous... Even the little  Flugblaetter American leaflets -after you read them  you imagined you read the truth that our government was  lying to us. I remember one after I read it I felt like  blowing my brains out. I never let one of our men read  them -but it was difficult -they were everywhere.  Comment The Boche is such a disciplined dope he turns all  leaflets in as ordered.  Experience showed that the percentage of leaflets turned in  according to enemy figures was 4 of the leaflets dropped.  Their soldiers turned some in kept the rest and passed them  around.  Comment What good is propaganda anyway Words never won wars.  The ans /er is from the other .side. When captured enemy docu ments reveal that their High Command hates and fears our leaflets when captured orders show that their soldiers are to be searched for leaflets before going on furlough when enemy commanders are ordered to assemble their units and give reasonable answers to leaflets -the facts are then plain about combat propaganda effects.  When enemy soldiers -or enemy units -approach with their hands  up -with leaflets in one hand -that is what psychological  warfare aims at. That is why aircraft crews and artillerymen  and patrols are asked to deliver the papers .  WHAT DID LEAFLETS DO Iht THE LAST WAR  The objective in a psychological warfare offensive is the morale  of whole armies and peoples. The morale of an enemy can be  undermined. Mo single weapon does it but leaflets are the  best proved weapon contributing directly to the demoralization  of armies.  The morale of the German army in March 1918 was at a sufficiently  high level to sustain the greatest offensive -designed as a  breakthrough to end the war -of the whole period 1914-1918.  It came reasonably close to success as did the two succeeding  offensives.  Six months later the morale of that army was so low that the  German High'Command requested an armistice.  It is generally agreed that the immediate causes of the German  collr.pse in the autumn of 1918 were a dissipation of  reserves coincident with resumption of war of movement   breeching the Hindenburg lines ' b disappearance of one of  the two main linos of possible German retreat the Montmedy-   Mezieres railway c army morale too damaged to carry out a  last Hindenburg retreat coincident with collapse of civilian  morale.  These were decisive added to the background of war weariness  the crumbling of the left flank extension Austria-Balkans-   Turkey diminishing supplies especially tanks the Russian  revolution the blockade and the hopes for a Wilson peace .  In factor c cited above an essential element was the sus  tained and intensified Allied propaganda offensive. It was  the poisoned arrows of Allied leaflets -according to the  German High Command documents -which finished off all efforts  to restore their armies morale enough to save the armies., Page -8  September 5th 1918 in an amazing manifesto. Marshal von Hindenburg the weightiest German leader left brought the leaflet battle into the open with a desperate appeal to Army and Homeland. Hindenburg proclaimed   The enemy conducts his campaign against our spirit by various means. He bombards our front not only with a drumfire of artillery but also with a drumfire of printed paper. Besides bombs which kill the body his airmen  . throw down leaflets which are intended to kill the soul.   Of these enemy leaflets our field-grey men delivered up in May 84 000 in June 120 000 in July 500 000. A gigantic increase..   ..The enemy hopes that many a field-grey soldier will send home the leaflet which has innocently fluttered down from the air. At home it v/ill pass from hand to hand and be discussed at the beer table in families in the drawing room in factories and in the street. Unsuspect ingly many thousands consume the poison.  Today we carry the leaflet to the home as well as to the trench.  WHAT HAVE LEAFLETS DONE IN THI3 YtAR  The morale of the Nazified armies in fifth year of war 1943 is by no means impregnable. The same old cracks are appearing as in 1914-1918. Widening the cracks means shortening the war.  Adolf Hitler on the subject of propaganda speaks with an experience few question. He says   This persistent propaganda began to have a real influence on our soldiers in 1915. The feeling against Prussia grew quite noticeable amongst Bavarian troops...   In this direction the enemy propaganda began to achieve undoubted success fror 916 onwards.    Lieut-General von Metsck German authority on war says   500 000 pamphlets weighing a ton may be more effective than an air raid with 100 tons of explosives.  In the British campaign In Libya in 1940 after a leaflet raid' on Bardia 7 000 Italian troops with their general came out and surrendered.  General Wavell then C-in-C Middle East reported to the War Office early in 1941 as follows   Our propaganda achieving great and growing results. Leaflets dropped by RAF over Italian lines distributed by many officers to their men. High Command orders to burn leaflets disobeyed. Opinion among prisoners that leaflets over Italy would weaken Italian will to continue war.  Captured Italian colonel Orlando Figante commanding the 158th Regiment reported to General Wavell   Your leaflets worked to destroy our resistance especially in Bardia. The troops spread them and were demoralized. They brought the leaflets to their officers asking for explanations. We could not give any. The troops felt they had been tricked into the war., THEN THERE WAS TUMS.  More recently the Tunisian campaign showed once for all what psychological warfare can do to help win the war a little sooner.  In the final weeks of the campaign when the Axis troops were being squeezed deeper and deeper into the coffin corner of the peninsula the leaflet and radio barrage was booming.  The leaflets had safe conducts printed on one side. Enemy soldiers already pretty well discouraged by the turn of military events found in the las flats the final necessary push to bring them over in surrender.  This means just this. It means that every enemy soldier who came over with a safe conduct stopped shooting a clip or two earlier than he would have done otherwise. Multiply a few rounds by the number of prisoners taken and you begin to get an idea of just how many extra cartridges were NOT fired into our lines.  The total number of prisoners pushed into surrender in Tunisia by the final nudge of the leaflets probably never will be known.  You would have to talk to each prisoner separately to find out.  For every prisoner did not show a leaflet when he came over. Not by any means.  But every Italian soldier taken had seen at least one Allied leaflet in those final weeks. And for every soldier who says   Sure I came over because of that safe conduct there ere a dozen others in whom the growing discouragement with the military situation was.heightened by some fact they had read in a leaflet maybe even nays before their final surrender.  AND PANTELLERIA.  Remember how the Italian island of Pantelloria gave up without a fight This is what leaflets had to do with that operation.  The Allied forces' invitation to surrender was dropped on the island in the shape of a leaflet which was addressed to the garrison and the civilian population. The leaflet reproduced a letter to the enemy commander from General Spaatz.  And it was through this leaflet addressed not to him but to  the garrison end the civilian population that the commandant learned about the letter to him.  The second surrender letter also was dropped as a leaflet. Then  the enemy commander ordered the white flags and crosses put out  -before he knew that our land forces were approaching.  Earlier the island had been softened up by barrages of several of the same leaflets that were being showered on Italy itself.  THEN SICILY.  Psychological Warfare worked in Sicily the way it had worked in  Tunisia.  Approximately 80 per cent of the Italian prisoners questioned in  Sicily either had with them or had read at least one of the  leaflets showered on them.  Just what this did to their morale can be judged by what one  captured Italian general said. He said he could do nothing to maintain the morale of his men when they were plastered with   hundreds of these leaflets every day . He said there was no  question that the leaflets told the truth.  And hundreds of prisoners agreed with the general., Pc-ge 10  During the Sicilian cr.npr.ign the Strategic and Tactical Air  Forces dropped 15 000 000 leaflets in one record week -a fine  example of co-operation in total war.  In one sector on a particular day 40 rounds of leaflet shells were fired. Even before the last round had been fired seven  German prisoners csuo over waving leaflets. And 65 of the  first 100 German prisoners taken at this point in the line had  our leaflets with them -most of then in their shoes because  the Germans punish any of their troops who are found with  leaflets on them.  A PWB officer flew over Trapani in a Cub plane dropping leaf  lets addressed to the people of the town calling on them to  put out white flags to save the city. By the time he flew back  after all his leaflets had boon dropped the town looked as  though all the washing in the world were hung out there. Every habitable quarter showed white.  PWB officers went into Palermo with the first troops and helped  save the local radio transmitter from sabotage. A captured  enemy telegram had ordered the station be wrecked. As it was  the st tion went on the air soon after we entered the city. It  is on the air daily now broadcasting to the local population  the story of our side in the war. Instead of the enemy s side.  PWB opened the movie theaters in Sicily the ones that hadn't  been wrecked by bombing. They seized Fascist films and began  showing American and British movies instead.  PWB got the owners of the two Palermo newspapers together and among them they started a new daily paper. In less than three weeks the circulation of this paper was up to 50 000.  And in a completely different field PWB officers made contact with members of the anti-Fascist underground movement in Sicily. Through these contacts they were able to find trustworthy personnel for the Allied Military Government when it moved in  to take over the civil administration of the towns and cities.  PWB AIDS TO hELP fOU.  Maybe you didn't see psychological warfare operate in Tunisia or in Sicily. But before this war is over you will wherever you sre.  Then it will be for you to decide whether or not this new science of war helped bring the successful end a little sooner for us and a little less expensively in Allied lives and material.  PROPAGANDA IS A PROVEN WEAPON OF WARFARE...  Leaflets won't Win the War Alone Radio won't Win the War Alone Propaganda won't Win the War Alone  BUT...  Neither Will Bombs... nor Bullets... Nor Bayonets... Used Alone  It is Only Through the Integrated Use of  ALL Arms Services and Weapons that Victory  will be Achieved., FC- January 1944 COMBAT PROPAGANDA IN THE FIELD INDEX TO PAPERS I Introduction to papers. II P.W.B. Organization and Network. Ill Combat Teams their Organization Equipment and Personnel. IV Tasks and Uses of a Combat Team. V Leaflets. VI Posters and Booklets. VII Davidson Press and Printing. VIII Public Address Van. IX. Press and Newspapers. X XI Photo Section and Films. XII Black Propaganda. XIII Intelligence. XIV Lecture Programme. Radio Installations, I  January 1944.  INTRODUCTION  The papers on Combat Propaganda in the Field have been written to accompany a series of three lectures given at  P.W.E. School G.H.Q. K.E.F. They deal with the organization and experiences of a combat propaganda group  hereafter called the Combat Team belonging to Psychologic Warfare Branch INC A.F.H.Q. hereafter called P.W.B. which took part in the Sicilian campaign and which has been engaged on a similar task in Italy since the landings in the Gulf of Salerno. In both campaigns the terms have beer made up of mixed American and British military and civilian personnel. Co-operation understanding and discipline has been excellent in the teams under whoever has been in command and all have worked together as a team and not as individuals belonging to two different Allied armies.  The opinions expressed in those papers are those of the undersigned officer who has been a member of the teams  throughout the two campaigns., II Pago 1 January 1944.  P.W.B. ORGANIZi-TION AND PSTPORK. P.W.3. is an allied organization consisting of both American and British military and civilian personnel. The American personnel have been principally supplied by O.W.I. O.S.S. M.I.D. and U.S. Signal Corps while the British personnel come from M.O.I. P.W.E. S.O.E. and I.C. It is part of the Information and Censorship Branch at A.F.H.Q.  known as INC which is divided into the following groups  a .Censorship. b .Public Relations. c . P.vV.B. Each department works separately and independently but they are co-ordinated by Brigadier General MacClure and his staff who are directly responsible to General Eisenhower.  P.W.B. is under the command of Colonel C. B. Hazeltine U.S. Army who in November 1942 brought the small original group out to North A-frica. The Headquarters is divided into the following sections  a .Commandin-officer and bis staff. b .Admin strati on. c .Press. d .Broadcasting. e .Radio Technical. f . Posters and pr pr. anda publications gJ. Films h .Press photos i .Printing. j .Leaflets. k .Intelligence. l .Interrogation. m .Monitoring.  From its Headquarters in nlgiors P.W.B. began rapidly extend ing its network by opening up regional offices in Casablanca Oran and Constantine which became responsible for all propaganda activities within their areas.  In addition the combat units were formed and sent to the Tunisian front. There the units consisted of a few officers who worked in a more or less independent manner from Army or Corps H.Q.'s down to Divisions. Each officer had a Jeep and a driver. Their principle tasks were the interrogation of P.O.W. writing of German and Italian leaflets delivery of leaflets for distribution by shell editing local newspapers sending intelligence back to H.Q. P.W.B. and a host of other jobs which every officer is called upon to do in the field. In addition to this a public address van toured the area giving news to the civilian population. Shortly before the fall of Tunis another group went up to the front whoso object was to enter the city with the forward troops in order to capture and take over as soon as possible the radio station and principle printing works after this had been accomplished this group obtained and opened up the P.W.B. Tunis base offices and mess for the base team which followed shortly'afterwards.  On the conclusion of the Tunisian campaign the officers and men who had taken part in these combat operations returned to  P.W.B. Headquarters where they were eventually reformed with additions into the two-teams which took part in ohe Sicilian campaign. The team with each army both in Sicily and Italy has been co-ordinated by a small P.W.B. section at 15th Army Group., III 2 January 1944  COMBAT TEiliS i \'D THEIK ORGASfIZITIOilo. A Conbat Tear is v. group of propaganda specialists intelli gence officers and technical personnel whose object is a .to weaken the norale of the Black propaganda. b .To keep its Headquarters supplied intelligence of all types for background material and  intelligence sunnaries which are produced by the Headquar  ters Intelligence Section who in turn feeds the material  back to London and Washington. A Team varies in size and  equipment according to the operation it has to accomplish and may be attached to Army H.Q. or any other convenient formation.  The first and most important duty of a Combat Team on being attached to a Headquarters for an operation is to get to know  the members of various organizations which it will liaise and work with during the operation. If possible the Team should get out into the field with the Headquarters to which it is attached well before the operation so that visits can be made and nutu.' l confidence and understanding built up before every one is too busily engaged in all the last minute preparations with which everyone is concerned before the operation commences This is particularly import nt in the case of Combat Propaganda    as it is still an almost untried weapon in some theatres and many staff officers are not willing to accept it until they  can be convinced of its usefulness.  Both in Sicily and Italy the Teams have been attached to the   I Branch at Army H.Q. This has proved very satisfactory  though in s-'me respects. Combat Prop ganda is more allied to   Ops Group in cases such as leaflet distribution for special  tactical operations and control of the civilian population by  imblic address vans.  The attachment to I Branch has worked out very well as there is a great deal of useful information which cm be given to and obtained from the I staff. Much of this information is Political and Security Intollijence two items which the Intelligence officers have to follow very carefully if the team is to be really efficient.  \ suggestion whic1 has not yet been tried but which might vorkwell is that the Combat Team instead of being attache  to one of the branches should be treated as Army troops and   '-' ' --' ----'7 ------- /  be a separate branch under its leader who would be responsible directly to the Chief of Staff in a similar manner to the C.R or C.R.F The success of a Combat Team in any operation depends chiefly upon its personnel who must be carefully chosen for their  qualities and qualifications. They must have plenty of  initiative and adaptability as these qualities are of para mount importance in addition to their qualifications and  finally they must pull together as a team. Often in actual  operations one is called upon to do numberless jobs which are  quite incidental such as acting as an interpreter or interro  gator for some other organization rouio monitoring cooking  and M.T. repairs. Administration of the teams makes up much  time ana an administrative officer is an essential addition if much time is n.t to be wasted.  The present team with the 5th Army is composed as follows, Davidson   Italian Private P-.4i  nnounccrs Clerks Jec-ps Cars Trailers Vans Press   Officers Drivers  Connanding officer German Interrogation and leaflet Leaflet and Shell Distrihaticn Writers 1 3 2 1 & 1 1 2 1 1 x Italian Intelligence 2 1 2 1 Signals and Radio lachi ic '.an x Press x Radio Broadcasting x Films Public Address Vans x Davidson Press 1 1 i 2 2s 2 1 1 1 2 2 Office Personnel Officers Drivers Itall ir i announcers Clerks Total 'e sonnel IS 8 2 51 Jeeps Private Csrs P.A. Vans Davi Ison Press Total Tspt. 5 3 2  2 12 and one trailer  November 1943  At pressit wording at Naples Base  movina camera men.   These officers are both still ana   e s Driver-oper tors., III Pcige -4 January 1944.  Propaganda material and posters are distributed by all menbers of the team. Out of a. total of 16 officers5 seven speak Italian and five German. Everyone in the team is more or less a specialist of some sort or other though everyone has often  turned their hands willingly to any task outside their duties which they nay have to perform it would be desirable if one or two non-specialist officers were available to handle some of  the jobs which do not call for specialised personnel which are already fully occupied. Everyone should be able to drive a car  Equipment.  This has played a big part in the success of the team and the items mentioned below have all stood up to the test under active service conditions well in fact much of the equipment which we had in Sicily is new doing good service in Italy. One of the difficulties in the field is to find adequate time for maintenance. The equipment used has been almost 100 of American manufacture.  M.T. M.T. has been entirely Jeeps except for some private cars which have been requisitioned. The Jeeps have been first class trans port in every way. They are remarkably tough little cars with an uncanny cross country performance. They will take a lot of beating for any operations of this nature even taking into consideration their snail amount of loading room and the dis comfort of travelling by them in cold weather. Carrying cap acity can be increased by building r rack on at the back. This has proved . most useful place to put bedding rolls etc. and other bulky but not too heavy articles. All transport should for preference have a four wheel drive the advantages of it are very notices ole t t the front now that the ground is torn up and muddy. The use of trailers can double the carrying cap acity of the transport and are excellent for carrying leaflets and other printed propaganda material. Priva.te Cars.  Private cars which hive been requisitioned or found on the  battlefield go a long way to help the ever-present transport  problem. They are often in bad mechanical condition and badly  tyred none tire less they are always worth picking up and  keeping until they prove unserviceable. Tyres for them are  the chief problem as they are almost unobtainable.  Public Address Vans.  Two types of P.A. Vans are in use  a .A four-wheel drive studobaker  fixed on top. This truck has an excellent cross country  performance and is ideal for use near the front. It has a  sound carrying distance of about two miles in favourable  conditions.  b .A very large six-wheel drive  and showing films. This van was primarily designed for  advertising tours in the United States is an excellent  piece of equipment wherever there are good roads but has  not proved satisfactory in front line conditions oMng to  its bad cross country performance and unwieldiness. This  van is more suited to P.A. in base areas., III Pc.ge -5 January 1944  Portatlo Printing Press.  The Davidson portable printing press is carried in two trucks plus a trailer generator. One truc is the press and paper  store while the other is a photographic laboratory. This is l good piece of equipment if well Looked after but it has broken down sometines and in actual practice it has been used very little.  Radio Racoivers.  Two portable battery-operated Hallicrrfter receiving sets have been used in both canpaigns these sets which receive both short and nediun waves are capable of running off the electric mains when current is available. These are used for monitoring and listening to news broadcasts.  Uotor Generator.  A useful addition to the toam would be a. motor generator set mounted on a truck so that electric power is available for running whatever printing works are taken over as the electric power supply is usually not working. It should be able to produce at least the equivalent .f 20 H.P. in kilowatts. Two such sets only of sli fitly lower power have been used in Naples with success until the electric power came on but they have not as yet been allocated to the Combat Team.  Posters and i rjoa.ganda batorial.  /. large number of e sters and propagand booklets are always carried for distri.nrti.'n to the civilian population.  Tents.  No tentage is carrier except for personal pup tents as adequate tent ve has so f r boon supplied by the Army H.Q. when suitable illets have been unobtainable.  Water and Fiod.  It is essential to carry a good supply of drinking water in  5 gallon cans when advancing into large centres as the water  supplies are invariably destroyed and it is usually three or  four days before water points are established nearby. An  adequate supply of rations should be carried too for such  emergencies.  Arris.  A.11 officers have revolvers or automatics while some have rifles or tommy guns in addition. All other ranks have rifles. Office Equipment.  Two or three typewriters and some stationery. Tables and  chairs are usually improvised or borrowed from some nearby  house.  When all the items are loaded in addition to the personal kit  of the members of the team the transport is fully laden and  it is doubtful if more technical equipment could be carried  without the addition of further transport., , , V 8 January 1944.  LEAFLETS.  Though leaflets were used at the end of the Great War by the Allies it was not until the present conflict that they have become one of the leading weapons for undermining enemy morale.  The leaflets can be divided into various types  Strategic.  Long range strategic leaflets which are dropped from the air by the strategic bombing force. These leaflets are the task of the base section which is stationed near the Strategic Bombing force and which is usually several hundred miles away. These leaflets are not the task of a Combat Team  Tactical.  These are the leaflets produced in the field by the Combat Team. Their functions ere two-foldj to break down the morale of the ene ..y in the front-lines and to inform him in certain tactical  situations that his position is hopeless and that he might as well give himself up. In the latter case Lrissez passer leaflets have been used with success and troops have come over  carrying then in their hands.  Leaflets to civilian .populations on the Other silo of the line.  These are used to encourage partisan resistance keep up morale and to give instructions to the people who are awaiting liber ation on the other side of the line.  Leaflets to civilian 'oo. ulations on tbe A11led side of the line.  These have been used to give informati n to the civil population when radio P.A. and the press have not been available. They arc useful for answering the large number of questions the  people always want to know when their area has recently been libera ted.  black an' Clandestine Leaflets.  These will be dealt with in paper XII in the series.  P.W.B. Tactical leaflets written and produced by the Combat Teams have proved r. valuable factor in lowering the enemy s morale both in Sicily and Italy On many occasions prisoners have come over and given thornselves up holding our leaflets in their hands and as many as 60 h ava had them in their pockets when searched and in some cases several different leaflets which they have errried about in the hope that they would be able to use them as a laissez-passer some day. Few If any doubt the facts and arguments written in the leaf  lets and all state that they have undoubtedly undermined the morale of the troops.  A stack of ready prepared leaflets is always carried but they  are rarely used as fresh leaflets with current facts and argu ments in them are quickly written and produced by the teams.  Leaflets have been a great success with the 5th Army in Italy  and s supply of shells loaded with leaflets are now delivered  to all Army units in the field each week., V P&gG  9 January 1944.  Distribution of Lecflets.  There are three ways of distributing leaflets by air shell or hand.  By Air.  This means has not been used much by the Combat Teams as the  tactical bombers are usually stationed too far from the area where the combat team is working.  Delivery by Army reconnaissance aircraft is only possible when very favourable wind conditions prevail as these aircraft are  too easy a target for the enemy A.A. to risk sending them across the-enemy lines. Occasionally a fighter pilot will carry a few as a favour.  By Shell.  This is the type of distribution which has been and is being most commonly used. Both the British 25 pounder and the American 105 m.n. base ejection smoke shells are ideal for the purpose. Both types are loaded weekly by the Combat Team with rectangular leaflets. Circular leaflets are no longer used as rectangular leaflets have proved to be just as effective. Both these shells hold from. 200 to 1200 leaflets according to their size and the thickness of the paper. The O'1 x 4 size is the one most commonly used.  Before inserting the leaflets into the shell the leaflets should be relied very tightly into bundles and bound with a thin strip of paper which breaks when the shell bursts. Leaflets packed in this manner are 99 legible and intact after the burst. Though some of the outside ones are crinkled from the burst even these are perfectly legible.  Gee Appendices A and B for diagrams and instructions for loading both types of shell.  Dy Hand.  This method of distributi n is primarily for the civilian population in the areas near the front occupied by the AJ-lies which are without news end are still stunned from the battle which has just passed through their area. Leaflets asking the people to maintain order and informing them that an A.M.G. officer will shortly be arriving to help them get their town and area working noracily again have had a calming effect on the people.  Distribution is sometimes difficult as the crowd often mobs and eventually swrnps whoever is giving the leaflets out. One of the most effective ways of distribution providing there is not a lot of motor traffic in the road is to drop a few' off all the time while passing through towns and villagesl They are always quickly picked up y the inhabitants.  When there have been large gaps in the enemy lines leaflets have been given to selected refugees going over to the other  side with instructions to drop them along roads at night. Volunteers for this Work are not hard to find but it is of  course hard to ascertain to what extent they have carried out  their instructions.  Any member of the team may distribute leaflets by hand and it  is always wise to carry a small selection on every vehicle  preferably in a locker or under the seat so that everyone knows where to find them if they are required., VI Petge -10 January 1944.  POSTERS MD PR0PAGMD1 BOOKLETS.  A considerable number of posters and booklets are always  carried by the team for general distribution to the people.  Though this is really the task of the Base Section the dis  tribution of such material has proved to be a morale builder  among the people at a moment when they are feeling flustered  and demoralised.  The demand for such material is always tremendous. The policy  of distributing it sparingly has been adopted in order to keep up interest and keep it at a premium as it is felt that more  people will read the booklets this way than if they were given  away wholesale.  In Naples an experiment was made to see if such material would  sell at moderate prices small assortments were given to a.  few newspaper sellers wh found a ready sale and who soon came  back for further supplies. These sellers were always ready to  pay cash in advance with an allowance of 25% for their profit.  Similar booklets are now being scId in Naples at the Propaganda  Shop belonging to the Base Section. It has been suggested that  funds realised from the sale of such material are given to  charities such as the Red Cross.  Erection of Posters.  This task can easily be accomplished in large centres by getting the local municipal bill posters to do it. The posters should be c ounted in front of him otherwise a large number are likely to be given away by him to the crowd which always collects while they are being put up and who invariably asks for copies. He should be given a few instructions regarding the height to hang them the best places and the types of posters to be put up on various buildings e.g. Posters of Churchill and Roosevelt are very suitable for erection on Public and Municipal buildinas. It is always a wise precaution to toll the billposter that you will go round and look at his. work after he has finished and that every poster must be put up.  In villages and small places where no billposter exists the local police are the best people to approach. Similar ins tructions as those for the billposter should be given to them.  Distribution of Propaganda Booklets.  If not being sold these can be best distributed in the sa me manner as leaflets by hand viz Paper V . There is always a b.uge demand for these end they create much interest. Speeches and talks by Churchill Roosevelt and Colonel Stevens are particularly popular.  The duties of poster erection and propaganda booklet dissemin ation are undertaken by all members of the team. The usual rule is that whoever goes first to a place where this task has not been done undertakes to do so though for lack of time it often cannot be done until later., VII Pc.ge -11 January 1944.  DAVIDSON PRESS AND PRINTING.  The Davidson Press viz. Paper III Equipment Section for short description has not been used much in either campaigns as adequate printing facilities with a wider productive scope have always been found so far though with the present scorched earth policy of the enemy this equipment may play a more important role in the future. Apart from generator trouble the press has worked well. The press is an ideal unit for producing highly confidential documents or black propaganda material as only one man is required to operate it.  The officer in char e of the Davidson Press should be a printing expert and technical advisor to the team when local  printing facilities are taken over and operated. This has not happened so far in practice as another officer has been avail able for this task and. the officer in charge of the press has  taken press photographs.  Some of the principle activities of the team depend on adequate  printing facilities being available. So far these have been found in all the towns which ha ve been entered though in the  early stages they are usually only capable of being hand oper ated on account of the electric power supply being off. Two motor generator sets have been used to supply current to printing works which wore in areas where the main electric  supply of current had been draged. By their use it has been possible to produce leaflets rnd newspapers in large numbers where the production of hand operated presses would have only produced a fraction of the number.  So far the printing facilities have not been destroyed in the towns which have h-en occupied.  Except in the larger towns where there are lineotype machines and rotary presses flat bed presses and type which has to be hand set are the usual type found. These presses are however capable of producing large numbers of leaflets as twelve or more leaflets can bo produced simultaneously according to the  size of the press. Many more leaflets can be produced in this way per hour than with the Davidson press. Sometimes leaflets and a newspaper htve been produced simultaneously in the same  press.  Stocks of paper should be ascertainod in all occupied areas and depots established where it can be stored so that it will not be improperly used by any other printing works which may  be working on their own account.  It is the task of the officer in charge of the Davidson Press to see whatever printing works have been requisitioned and als to ascertain and protect whatever paper stocks have been found. The Press Officer often lends him a hand with these matters especially regarding stocks of newsprint for flat bed or rotary presses., VIII Pc. g -12 January 1944.  PUBLIC iiDDRESS VAl'I.  The two vans workin with the tean have been used principally  to tour the areas near the front which have been without  accurate news for some time on account of the various news  producing agencies such as the radio the press and the post  having broken down in the area because of hostilities.  These vans have been a great success both from a propaganda aspect and because of the pleasure and satisfaction they have given the people everywhere they have visited. They have also produced an excellent nediur. for dispelling rumours and getting the civilian population off the roads where they have been holding up military traffic.  The vans on pulling up play a gramophone record to collect a crowd which never fails ti fora rapidly before giving an eight or ten minutes news summary in Italian. In the past the summary has been produced by the Press Officer every morning before the vans set off for the day. The vans which are now based a few miles behind the front do their own monitoring for the daily news summary by means of a small portable radio which is carried on one of them.  The Italian announcers who travel on the vans live and feed with the team in the field. Plenty of good announcers for  this work can always be found.  The mobile cinema unit which the one van contains has not been used yet as it has been too usy doing P.A. work and on account of the blackout restrictions which make shows after dark impossible.  In Naples the vans have been used to make official announce ments in different parts of the town on behalf of A.M.G.  Wherever the vans go they distribute propaganda material and newspapers free.  One drawback near the front is that it is not always advisable to have a large crowd near a town or village in case of air attack by enemy aircraft another is that the crowd may slow down or hamper military traffic unless the place for the performance has been well chosen., , IX Page -14 January 1944.  Nearly everywhere the people are short of food in the early stages of occupation and they usually prefer to be given food in lieu of a salary this applies especially to night workers in the printing press. If possible a. special reserve of rations' should be obtained for this purpose. Authorization to draw a United anoimt of rations should be made to the proper military authority who is usually prepared to release then.  All newspapers which are started by the CombatvTear are taken over by the Base Section as soon as they are organized. The Press Officer often remains with this section until it is necessary for him to start a newspaper in some newly captured  town which is too far away to be supplied with the newspaper produced by the Base Section.  The number of copies printed of the daily newspaper often have to be limited to below the local demand on account of the shortage of newsprint for both flat bed and rotary presses.  Distribution tc distant Areas has often been difficult. In  the Naples area the A.wi.G. c urior service has been most helpful taking bundles of papers daily to distant areas which would have been without news otherwise., X Page -15 January 1944.  RADIO INSTALLATIONS AND BROADCASTING.  Radio Installations.  The two officers belonging to the U.S. Signal Corps are technical experts who enter newly captured towns at a very early stage and take over and put into operation the local broadcasting station and studios. The first thing to do after capturing a station or studio is to get a proper military guard for them as they are easy targets for sabotage. Care must be taken inspecting the equipment as booby traps are .likely to have been left behind a. good tip is get one of the engineers belonging to the station to inspect the station with an officer as he is more likely to notice any parts that have been tampered with.  If the station is found intact and in working order it does not take long to get it back on the air providing the electric power supply is available and some of the engineers have remained in the area as they will be needed to run it. The latter require a careful security check before they can be re-employed at former work. Actually there has never been any difficulty in obtaining suitable engineers as in most cases they have been eagerly awaiting the arrival of the Allied troops. In Palermo the engineers had taken away many of the vital parts for safety and hidden them in villages many miles away it took several days to collect all this equipment and as a consequence the station took longer to get on the air than  was anticipated.  In Naples the station had been entirely destroyed and our  engineers were able to do n thing with it except salvage a  certain amount of material. This material has been salvaged  and stored in order that it may be used as spare parts for any  other radio stations further n rth which may be able to use it  as spares.  At present the Naples radio programme is being transmitted by  a 1-kw. medium wave motile transmitter which PWB had previous  ly been using as a black transmitter. These technical experts  have salvaged other radio material which has been found in the  Naples area which will go towards reconstructing a. new trans  mitter. Our engineers at Bari have been able to construct a  10-kw. transmitter from salvaged material which has been found  in that area.  Broadcasting.  The duty of the Broadcasting Officer when the transmitter is  found to be intact is to organise a radio programme from the  local studies as quickly as possible. This programme is  designed primarily for the Italian population on both sides of  the line but a programme in German to the troops was put on  the air for a short time.  The studios both in Palermo and Naples were intact and did not  take long to get into working order and some of the old studio  staff were re-employed. The Broadcasting Officer has to rely  principally for his help on what local labour he can employ.  This has so far always been easy to organise in fact there  are usually several suitable applicants to choose from for each  available post.  The news service is supplied to him by the Press Section in a  form ready for transmission. Talks and commentaries are  usually given by various local personalities who are always, X 16 January 1944.  eager to speak. The text of their talks needs careful scrutiny and alteratlons often have to be made. In Naples representatives of all the five enti-Fascist political parties have been speckin at intervals programnes in Italian have been relayed fron 1 1giers and the J.S.A. A feature which has been introduced recently has been a series of short talks to the Italians on the other side of the line in which they have been given elementary sabotage instructions. The rest of the programme subject matter consists of musical items and occasionally officia1 announcer o-nts.  When the Broadcasting Officer has got the station running  smoothly he hands over to whichever base section is taking  the area over. He then either remains helping the base section  or returns to the team to await the capture or inauguration of  another broadcasting station., XI Page -17 January 1944.  PHOTO SECTIOH MD FILMS.  Photo Section.  Among the members of the team are three professional press photographers though in prrctice only one is usually employed at this task. All aspects of wartime photography are covered and special commissions from OWI executed. All negatives ere sent back after development direct to headquarters for copies to be printed and distributed.  Wherever the teams have been local dark room facilities have  been used for developing and Italian personnel have been  employed to work in them under the supervision of the photo officer. One of the officers in charge of one of the public address vans is also a professional moving camera man. His  camera is always carried on the van but so far no films have  been made.  In actual practice the photographic record of the war in the  5th Army area appears to be very fully covered by a number of  other official war photographers.  Films.  The films officer impounds all films and requisitions and closes all cinemas and theatres until such times as they can be reopened to show Allied films or those Italian films which do not contain propaganda or other enti-Allied matter. This is a whole time job and entails a great deal of travelling about. After Itrge centres like Naples have been controlled he has to visit every small town where there is a cinema. The films which are impounded arc all brought to a central depot usually the one belonging to the Luce film distribution company as their depots are usually equipped with excellent film storage facilities these offices are usually taken over for use by the films officer as they arc already well known to people in the film industry. Here the various local film distributors are called to a meeting where the situation is explained to them and they are told that as soon as it is possible to re-open the cinemas suitable Allied films will be given to them for distribution.  Cinemas and theatres are in theory all requisitioned by the  films officer on arrival at each town but this ha.s not always  worked out in practlce as other organizations such as the  American Red Cross and the Special Service Branch have  requisitioned theatres for their own use before the PWB officer  was able to do so PWB has however a directive in which it  is given the controlling authority for requisitioning theatres  The work of the films officer overlaps considerably into the  activities of the Base Section and it is usually not until  this section has been established that the films industry can  be completely organized and controlled.  No film shows have been given by the mobile combined P.A. and  cinema van so far as it has been fully occupied as a P.A.  van. A problem connected with open air showing of films  after dark is the blackout as restrictions are very rigorously  carried on near the front., XII Page -18 January 1944.  BLACK PROPAGANDA.  Black Propaganda has been undertaken by the team in both Sicily and Italy. Schemes are put into operation when suitable opportunities occur as it is difficult to work to a fixed programme with this type of propaganda. Any member of the team may contribute ideas but the actual schemes are handled by the intelligence officers in the team.  When agents are used they should be selected with the greatest care as it is often impossible to check when leaflets sticker or rumours have been circulated on the other side of the line and it is easy for an unreliable agent to return in a few days time stating he has accomplished his mission when in reality he has been lying up somewhere. Other organizations using agents are .ften willing to allow their agents to carry a few leaflets etc. or to brief then with rumours.  Types of Black Propaganda.  Radio. In Sicily a 1-kw mobile transmitter w s used for both Germain and Italian programmes. This is a. completely self-contained unit mounted on large trucks. Technicians programme personnel and announcers all travel with it. This unit is not being used in Italy yet as it is doing temporary duty acting as the Naples 1 kw transmitter  Leaflets. Stickers and Posters. A number of these are being distributed on the other side of the line all the time. Stickers arc the typo most commonly used though care must be taken to keep them dry when being carried otherwise they are difficult to affix or become stuck together  Newspapers. A semi-black newspaper has been produced at intervals for dis tribution principally by air though a few copies have been sent by hand. The main drawback to sending a newspaper by hand is that it is so bulky that very few copies can be carried in comparison to leaflets and stickers. Arrangements for dis tribution by air should be laid on well in advance with the proper authorities.  Rumours. Suitable rumours for dissemination in enemy territory are always sent by any available agent as they are a. type of propaganda which need not compromise the agent.  In the Allied occupied area rumours have to be both created and suppressed. There are always a. large number of rumours in any large centre many of them are however quite harmless and do not require suppressing.  Security Adequate security measures must be taken with all forms of Black Propaganda otherwise the mask which it hides behind will disappear. After printing black leaflets or stickers the type must be broken at once and trial pulls and proofs burnt. All radio script must be destroyed or locked in a safe or other safe place., XIII Page -19 January 1944.  INTELLIGENCE.  The collection and distribution of various types of intelli gence is an important part of the teams' activities. A large volume of intelligence is always being collected evaluated and then passed on in the form of suuauries and reports. A proportion of the intelligence collected is not directly connected with P.W.B.'s activities such as operational and security intelligence this is always passed as quickly as possible to the proper organizations concerned.  Good relations should be established with all the other Intell igence organizations in the area as much valuable Information can be exchanged. In practice relationships with the other organizations has been without exception excellent and mutual confidence has been built up. P.W.B. has often been able to give considerable assistance to these organizations and it has established its position with then as a useful intelligence producin' agency.  The Intelligence section with the Combat Term does all the preliminary work f r the section belonging to Base section before it arrives. The handing over process for the Combat teem to the Base Section is done in stages in order to obtain continuity of the Cord at Team s activities. This is particu larly important in the case of local personalities with whom person-1 confidence has been built up.  DUTIES OF INTELLIGENCE SECTION.  Plans.  The Section is Iwrys studying and collecting intelligence covering the areas where the term is likely to advance a names and addresses of personalities  to P.W.B. or who are likely to contact it are collected  particulars c -ncernine personalities to be avoided are  also collected. b .The collection f inf-mati  stations printing w rks paper mills and suitable places  for offices and billets in towns which will be occupied in  the future.  Political and Economic.  Intelligence of this .type is collected fr mo both sides of the  lines. The political situation is followed carefully and  contact made with the loaders of all political parties in the  areao occupied by the Allies.  Documents.  All municipal buildings offices consulates etc. must be  searched for documents of interest. These provide useful  matter for background propaganda intelligence.  Investigation of Atr.city Stories.  Reports of atrocities committed by the enemy are made in order  that they may be rec.rded for any war guilt trials which may  be held at a later date. These reports are also sent beck to  Headquarters P.W.B. f r background material.  Black Pr- o. iamenda.  Arrangements for the dissemination cf this type of propaganda is Gone by the section., XIII Page -20 January 1944  Card Index.  A card index ef Italian personalities is kept and continually  added t'...  P.V/.B. Security.  a .The section gives advice .-n Italian  employed by r who liaise with P.W.B. officers b .Is responsible f r the safety burning of waste paper. c .The section btrins guarus f r used by P.W.B., XIV Page -21 January 1944  LECTURE PROGRAMME.  Tuesday 30 Nov 43 1200 h-urs.  a .Introducti n. 1 . Conbet teams their 'rrrtnization equipment and personnel c Tasks and uses of a Combat Team.  Wednesday 1 Dec. 43 1200 hours.  a . Leaflets. b .Posters and B klots. c .Davidson Press and Printing. d .Public address Van. e .Press and Newspapers. f .Radis Installations and Broadcasting. g .Photo Sect n road Films.  Thursday 2 Dec. 43 1700 hours.  a .Black Pr -pa rnda. b .Intclli onco. c . Sicilian and Italian Campaigns.  Friday 3 Dec. 43 1700 h-urs.  a . Discussi-n period., FC.5  January 1944.  WAS PROPIG/illDA IN EUROPE  PRANCE  BRITISH.  s' . General. Our propaganda was handicapped at the outset by an almost total lack of relevant intelligence on our ex-Ally. The  B.B.C. began its work with the prosumption probably correct in view of the-contemporary Oran incident that 90% of Frenchmen were against us. Its first basic theme like Ge Gaulle's -was that the war h d not yet been won by Germany that it would be a long war and that it would be decided in the end by American industrial strength. The attempt to' build up the blockade of German-occupied Europe as a positive propaganda theme met with effective counters from the Germans until they began -towards the end of 1940 -to requisition French wine. This killed their case and from then on we could count on French anti- German feeling. Britain's propaganda task has been to.turn this feeling first into h we. then into certainty of Allied victory and lastly into a practical will to con tribute to this victory. The entry of Russia and America int-the war obviously facilitated this process during 1941  b Special Lines.  Great care has been taken in all British propaganda to avoid the impression of British interference in French internal affairs. It has h.-wevor been necessary to repec.t constantly that -11 French colonies occupied by Great Britain in the course of the war will certainly be returned to France afterwards. The need for this is obvious in view of the fact that our main territorial successes uu t the present year have been gained in Syria 194l and Madagascar and IT. Africa 1942 .  Along with the boosting of American industrial strength the flaws in Germany's war economy have been stressed and this point has been constantly linked with propaganda  both a motive and instructional against the releve. Attacks on the Vichy administration as betrayers of France have not included at ler.st until very recently personal attacks on Retain.  The apparent divergence in British and American diplomatic policy towards Vichy was reflected in the linos of propaganda employed the British being more actively provocative the American being more sympathetically understanding . This apparent political divergence was of course employed by the two Governments and its fruits were seen in the N. African landing.  c . Gaullisni.  General de Gaulle has never run a radio programme of his own from Great Britain. He was used as an individual spokesman in the programme Los Franjais parlent aux Francis which was the standard B.B.C. service to France and entirely planned by British personnel. General de Gaulle gained much of his prestige in France through this service which he was believed to control. His own speeches were far more confident and uncompromisingly anti-Vichy than any others given in this service during 1940. At that time this made de Gaulle seem unrealistic to French listeners but the memory of his firm line at that time has helped to build up his now very great, Prga -2 January 1944  prestige in France. It was only after November 1912 that French listeners began to realise that the 3.B.C. service to them was not in fact a ds Gaulle progranae.  d . Present BritishJlalicv..  British long-range propaganda to Franco is now entering a nore nearly operational stage. Encouragement of resistanceattitudes can now give place to ene ourrgeaient of resistancepreparatlons. The attempt is being made to ensure that wireless listening shall be treated not as entertainment or as an easy moral prop but -like A.E.P. duties in England -r.s a definite operational task.  GERMAN.  a .General.  Until the end of 1942 the Germans persevered -through radio and the press of their various collaborators -in their Meutoire-collnborationist propaganda. This had only a short-lived success during 1940. It became useless as soon as their total econcmo penetration their requisit ioning and their mobilisation of French labour were properly understood by the French. Since the end of 1912 German home props.gends has definitely accepted the fact that France has let Germany down and open exploitation of French resources is now their accepted policy . The result is that none of the previous collaborationist parties is now openly pro-Goman. The P.P.F. just like the Spanish Falange remains linked to Germany only m the basis of common anti-Bolshevik program3. The Laval administration is of course tied to Germany hand foot -and neck.  b .Sooctr1 Lines.  Anti-British ind anti-semitic propaganda heve both been well-developed nd have found their way into school books as well as providing the staple of newspaper literature and radio programmes. Both these lines are likely to have some lasting effect. Anti-Bolsheyik propaganda has been wholesale and splurgy . nd It is a fair races that it has done no harm whatever to the position of the Soviet Government in French esteem. German propaganda concentrates chiefly on the radio and the films -though with rapidly dwindling success with both these media --no it has tended to leave the newspapers to collaborationist elements in Paris and Vichy. Mass rallies of collaborationist parties on the German model have proved completely unsuccessful.  c .German Counter Measures  The most obvious method is the confiscation of private radio receivers. The motive for doing this is strengthened by the fact that the Germans have lost faith in their own radio propaganda in France and that for informing local populations German military commanders prefer the medium of affiches to either radio messages or loudspeaker announcements., FC.6  RUSSIA iiiD EaLIGION  Notes cm a lectm-s by Sir Bernard Pares at Trinity College Toronto on the 25th of February 1944  Thesis  That religious repression under the Soviet always leas successful end generally less severe then under the Tsars has now been eliminated in Russia  Peter the Greet to 1905.  1. Peter the Great deposed the Patriarch and placed the Church under strict Monarchist supervision. 2. No religious recognition was afforded to any racial minority with a distinct religion of its own. 3. Priests were forced under duress to turn informers against their own parishioners. 4. The Church Council was disbanded. B. 130 to. 19.I .. 1. The Church demanded the rainstallation of the Patriarch. The demand was vetoed by order of Rasputin. 2. Josef Stalin was imprisoned on religious I grounds for roading Victor Hugo. c. la Z-ija. 1. With the fall of the Monarchy the Church was given back its Patriarch and its Council. 2. The Soviet charged with the confiscation of all privately-owned land in Russia not unnaturally included all Church lands in its confiscations. 3. Infiltration among Soviet authorities of Marx's nonsensical dictum Religion is opium for the Masses  Religion cen be used as opium for the masses would have made sense  caused  A law that drove religious teaching from the schools stating that no-one under the age of 18 might be taught religion in groups of more than 3 or 4.  This led to religious instruction of children by the family even among pro-Revolutionxry religious sceptics. As always religious repression resulted in religious revival. The new law also marked the first step in religion s becoming an individual rather then an eoslosieatical concern subsequently a historically important trend  The threat as yet was not to the congregations but to the ministers.  d. 1921 .- i%a. 1. Complete breakdown of Soviet's first economic Fiv Tear Plan programme caused authorities to seek some irrelevant emotional target for universal disappointment. Cf. Nazi's anti-Semitism. 2. Religion was chosen and a frontal attack delivered including a .Organized arrest of Patriarch Baptist hierarchy.  b .The trial and execution of children under 18 in religion. ., Pag -2  3 The subsequent outcry in European and American Christendom dismayed the Soviet They released the Patriarch who received from the eople a colossal reception lasting days and days and days.  4 After Easter 1923 no further frontal attack was ever mad on the Church fcy the Soviet.  E. 1923 -1928. 1. Lunacharsky Minister of Education launched his indirect propaganda-attack on religiont Communion encourages drunkenness.  Communion spreads infectious disease.   High-altitude airmen have never found Heaven.  The soul is the nervous system. 2. Before throughout history one religion had generally persecuted another. How for the first time one Atheist State persecuted all Religions. With the to us not unexpected result that all religious denominations in Russia united and religion again revived increasingly as an unofficial individual concern rather than an officially ecclesiastical one. 3. By 1928 Lunacharsky had confessed his failure in the phrase Religion is like a nail. The harder you hit it the deeper it goes into the wood  y. i. -jazz.. 1. So far the Soviet had only been anti Religious Teaching. Now they began to teach Anti-Religion.  B.P. You cannot teach antl-anythincr.  2. So far there had been freedom of religious end anti-religious propaganda. How there was freedom of snti-religiou propaganda only. 3. So fax the Church had been j emitted to cany on some extraecclesiastioel activity such as child and social welfare. Now these activities were prohibited. 4. Yaroslavsky director of ell Soviet anti-religious activity inaugurated himself as President The Union of the Godless with the object of driving out religion by sheer Reason.  Anocdote Abyssal failure of scientific demonstration that Christ s water-into-wine miracle was chemical trickery.  5. Direct frontal attack on the Church was still witheld. Cf. Yaroslavsky s directive Don t pull down the Churches. Persuade theml 6. And yet the campaign failed. In 1937 Yaroslavsky reported to Stalin To-day 20 years after the Revolution one-third of the town population and two-thirds of the country population insist on holding to their own religion. G. 1937 to Present Day. 1. On receiving this report Stflin recognised and determined to undo twenty years of adstaken policy. He ordered Yaroslavsky to print two items of ne s in the  Godless Magazine, Page -3   . Sunduy x&a to be restored to the Russian Calendar at the wish of tiie people.  b . The 'Godless Magazine was to be closed on account of paper-ehortage.     2 A review of the religious situation resulted in the follovdng  long-desired Stalinite reforms  a .The disenfranchised priests were  Xaroslavsky was ordered publicly to endorse this measure.  b .Restrictions on Christians holding operative were lifted.  o . Sunday was restored to the Russian calendar.  . d .Ikons hitherto forbidden were  e .Body-crucifixes hitherto forbidden  3. More latterly the Patriarch has been restored. Through this restoration Stalin the Soviet has undone the bad work begun by Peter the Great the Monarchist 'because it is the will of the People. 4. To-day official contact has been re-established between the Church of England and the Russian Church. Cf. Garbutt'e visit to Moscow and the projected visit of Russian hierarchs to England. corcMJSiohs.  1. The Russian Church to-day is more free than at any other time since the days of Peter the Great. The time to be fearful for Russian religion was before the Revolution -not after it 2. But because of the long period of repression aider which religion has laboured a .It has become temporarily more the younger people. The distinction is quantative y small. At the last Easter Celebrations in Moscow the Cathedral ran two successive services for sta ding crowds each numbering approximately 10 000.  b .It is still more an individual concern. In the comtry every cottage is its own chapel.  3. Its future would seem to be assured beer-use a The Soviet Government and the Orthodox Church sire striving for the same end - the creation of the Kingdom of God on Earth end the welfare of the Common Man.  b .It is instinctive in the Russian physically sees Christ's resurrection in every succeeding Spring.  l,  TSLVE PRACTICAL QUSSTIONS OU .INDIA  INTRODUCTION.  It is one of the best-known tricks of controversy to ask questions in a way that cakes answering difficult or impossible.  E.g. -the unjust judge s When did you stop beating your wife There are in fact two kinds of questions  a The Practical Quostion  One to which a definite answer can be given on the basis of ascertainable facts -that answer helping to clarify the whole problem.  b .The Imractlcal71 Questions  One which rests on the tacit acceptance of false beliefs and statetvsnts about the problem even though it may use apparently practical words. Such a qxiestion makes it impossible to give an answer in terms of objective facts. This second kind of question is however capable of pro ducing important effects -especially when the subject tn question Involves strong personal feelings and interests.  Few problems have given rise to more impractical questions than the-Indian one both the Axis propagandists and our own prejudiced parties have mcae great use of them.  Belflrw twelve oroctlcal questions on India each accompanied by C related impractical question. It is evident that there  are more ' impractical questions in connection with India than pytctice mr.-.- s. For propaganda purposes the way tn handle an  impractical l question is a 'to show that it states the problem wrongly b to restate the problem correctly c to  give the facts in reply.  Here therefore is an opportunity to study some useful examples of this counter-propaganda technique in terms of some 'vseful facts about the Indian Problem.  1-HOW DID BRITAIN COHE TO RESPONSIBLE GOVERNMENT IN INDIA   NOT How and why did Britain take India from the Indians  Outline of Answer.  The British East India Trading Company became involved in the internecine wars of the Indian Princes and slowly came to assume tasks of government. spreading through Bengal steadily eastward. Only after 50 years -and after the military mut iny of 135S -did the first Government of India Act place  British India. under direct government from London and establish the Inctian States ruled by the Princes as feudatories of the Crown. Since that date India has been politically united only by the Crown which through the Viceroy is the supreme executive in British India and is paramount power over all the Indian Princes. The 1935 Government of India Act aimed at creating a Federal Union in which all powers would be in the hands of Indians save those of Defence Foreign Affairs and  Ecclesiastical Affairs. Only on the judicial plane has this Act been implemented., Page -2  2. DY WHAT STEPS HAS BRITAIN ATTEaIPTED TO FOSTER RESPONSIBLE GOVERNipTiiT BY INDIMS  NOT Why has not Britain long ago acceded to India s denends for self-governnent  Outline of Answer.  As we have seen prior to British rule there was no united India and hence no Indian government. The sub-continent was divided and politically retarded by inter-monarchical feuds.  In 1835 The Congress Party was founded chiefly through the work of two British Civil Servants who wished to educate Indians in democratic ideals and in a sense of political responsibility.  In 1892 The Indian Councils Act established Legislative Councils under Provincial Governors in part elected though in larger part appointed by Governors.  In 1909 The Indian Councils Act established the principle of direct election to all seats on these Legislative Councils.  In 1917 The ilontague-Chelmsford Declaration stated that the British Government's objective for Indie was Pro gressive realisation of responsible government in India as an integral part of the Empire.  In 1919 Tue Government of India. Act established for the first tim.u a Central Legislature of two Chambers -70 per cent of wuuse seats were to be filled by election.  In 1955 Government of India Act -see above.  In 1942 The Gripes Mission to India proposes Dominion Status for an Indian Union whoso constitution should be drafted immediately at the close of the present war by a purely Indian-elected constituent body.  WHAT HAVE BEEN THE MAIN EFFECTS OF BRITISH INVESTMENT AND ECONOMIC CONTROL THROUGH GOVERNMENT IN INDIA   NOT By what methods have British capitalists sought to exploit India - or capital investment is just as  selfish rad as interested in Araerica -or Argentina or in Britain itself as in India.  Outline of Answer.  To secure its own trade the East India Company was naturally interested to establish order and safe communications through out the country. The introduction of the rule of law was Britain's first real even if selfishly motivated contribution to India's welfare. Communications were greatly advanced by the railway-building of the 19th century an enterprise whose benefit to the Indian economy can be gauged by the fact that railway profits have always much more than covered the interest charges on the capital invested. Later in the 19th century real advances were made in the spheres of irrigation and of health and hygiene. These were the first benefits Britain brought tc Indie in return for a virtual monopoly of Indian trade.  Britain's privileged trading position in relation to India came to an end in 1921 when India obtained fiscal autonomy and was thus able to Impose taxes on goods especially Lancashire  co11ons frob Britain., Page o  Thet India has not provided a field or financial racketeering is suggested by the fact that its internal debt is -by V/estern standards -minute. In 1942 interest charges on it amounted to 1-1/2 million. That India has not roviaed a field for  careerist racketeering is shewn by the very ms&ll British membership of the I.C.S. Mexicia 2 000 end by the extremely strict competitive selection of the I.C.S.  It is perhaps important to add that India pays no direct taxes to Great Britain and that Britain is contributing heavily to the financing of India s war effort.  4. WHnT ARB THE PRINCIPLE CHARGES WHICH INDIANS C LEVEL AT BRITISH G0VEinJivlEl TB 0 H 'THE GROUNDS OF a IIfHIBITING' TNDTAN' DEVELOPMENT AHD nTWsCOUpJiGTHp INSIAH fflJITY  NOT Why has Britain retarded India s political development and discouraged its unity  Outline of Apswer.  a .British-sponsored developments of having neglected the special needs and potentialities of the Indian peasantry -the vest majority of Indie s popul ation. Ghandi s advocacy of household industries run in conjunction with agriculture is economically more realistic than is the setting up of urban industry on the western pattern side by side with a primitive and wasteful agricul ture. In general British economic enterprise lies open to the charge that it has sought to meet India s economic needs on the same lines as it hts met Great Britain's and Britain s European and western markets.  b .The British Government is not liable neglected education but it is open to the charge that it has conceived of the task of Indieai education on a too narrowly western pattern. Thus it has made possible   through schools universities etc. the rapid growth of the professional end technical class of Indian whilst hardly advancing the efficiency of the agricultural masses.  c .Social advances made on the pattern ian ideals have inevitably militated against the power of Hindu culture. In so far as a romantic return to Hindu values-is a part of the Indian Nationalist Movement it is clear -and inevitable -that Britain as much through its missionaries and schools as through its government end investment has hamstrung the Indian National Revival .  d .The establishment of separate representation legislatures for Hindus and Moslems is often cited as a purposive attempt on the part of the British to intensify India's religious divisions. On this argument Divide and Rule has been the strategic principle of British rule and there can be no doubt that this principle has in the past been admitted by certain responsible British officials. And this accounts in part for the mistrust accorded to more recent British attempts tc foster a sense of common responsibility among Hindus and Moslems with a view to realising a United India governed by Indians., Pega - 4  5. WEAT ASPECTS OF BF.ITISE llW IN GENERAL WESTERN DEMOCRATIC IDEALS AND ORG/JiIZATIOlTS HAVE AnTIClJLAPIY1 IITFLPENCED INDIA 1 S PRESENT POLITICAL LEADERS ' '  NOT Why do the British try to force their nethods of governnent -their forms of democracy even -on Indie  Outline of Ansv/er.  a .The belief that a novenent of National Liberation is ipso facto a democratic movement.  b .The fervent belief that anti-imperialism democratic -an inexact borrowing from the gospel of Marx.  c .The belief that democracy is equivalent  d The belief in racial oquality generalised by most Indian Nationalists to cover the anomaly of caste in Hindu civilisation.  A more recent borrowing -perhaps derived more from European Fascism or Communism than from European democracy -is this  e . The conception that a. political party should exist not as an instrument of Parliamentary government but as a pan political unit having as its aim the complete direction and domination of national life.  3. WHAT CLASSES OR TYPES OF INDIANS HAVE TAKEN THE LEAD IN THE 20t'h CENTURY INDIAN NATIONAL MOVEMENT  NOT Why and how have the Indian masses risen against the British Raj  Outline of Answer.  a .Primarily those who have benefited and have thus felt the impact of Liberal and/or Socialistic ideas enanatinfrom Europe.  b .The new professional class swollen of the country by the almost excessive provision of western educational facilities.  c .Followers of he romantic national Hindu and Moslem -which though oriental in content are patterned on nd inspired by similar movements in iSth century Surop .  Support has been lent to these forces by certain elements in Britain itself socialist. Liberal and Christian whilst recently Marxist critics of capitalism have used India as a very useful hobby-horse. Moreover the essentially English nabit of accepting and endorsing criticism of oneself has led. to the current iccoptance of a number of Indian charges against Britain which are very largely groundless.  7 TO WHAT EXTENT. AND IN WHAT SENSE. DOES THE CONGRESS PARTY REPRESENT THE HnJCRTTY OF INDIAN OPINION   NOT Why not let the Majority party speak and rule for Indi '  Outline of Answer  a . The Congress Party dominated in 7 out of the 11 provincial Legislatures a r re-elected in 1936., Page -5  b .Congress includes a number of of Hindus. It is impossible to give exact figures of the Moslem component as against e.g. the numbers of the Moslem League run by Mr. Jinneh.  c .Congress claims to have a following This is no doubt a large number as against the number adhering to other parties but it represents a very small fraction of India's total population.  d .As was hinted about Congress League -it is more a caucus of followers than an organised Parliamentary party. Its leadership is largely dictatorial it is held together by personalities rather than by broadly accepted principles and it suffers from a presumably undemocratic belief in its own Divine Right to rule India.  8. WHAT Alii THE GROUNDS OF GlhnDI'S PRESTIGE a WITHIN CONGRESS  b WITH THEIlIKDU MASSES. AND c TAT LEAST UNTIL REC5HTLY IN THB ESTIMATION OF LIBERAL-MINDED PEOPLE IN ALL COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD  NOT How has Ghendi come to be the popular leader of India  Outline of Answer to a .  Ghandi's ideas of governmental and economic organization do not  represent those of the majority of Congress which includes big  business magnates sccialistically inclined patriots reaction  ary Hindus end near-Communists s well as Ghandi's disciples.  Indeed Ghandi's constructive ideas are generally considered  outmoded by the younger spokesmen of Congress who nevertheless  are willing to follow him in the negative fight against the  British. Congress accepts Ghandi's leadership because  i . His world fane is unrivalled ii . He has a real popular appeal in India and  iii . Whatever his political failings no rival leader has ever had the self-confidence to speak and act against him for long.  Outline of Answer to b .  Ghandi's popularity with the Indian masses is in part a product  of operational propaganda but the basis of this propaganda is  undoubtedly Ghandi's personal magnetism and his sense of what  appeals to the mass of Indians. In general Indians accept  Ghendi not because they believe he is right but because they  believe he is good.  Outline of Answer to c  Ghandi's operational propaganda has been perhaps even more successful with public opinion in the West than in India itself.  He has appeared to many Westerners as a saint in politics and  as b -ing the one contemporary political leader making a radical sterui against materialistic end commercial values. To a smaller  and better-informed minority his apparently vague economic and  even political projects have appealed as being genuinely  applicable to contemporary India s need and capacities., Ps.fiQ O  9 WHAT ARE THE CAUSES OF INDIAN RELIGIOUS POLITICAL DIVISIOXIS   NOT Why does Brit in continue to play off one Indian party against another  a .The political disorder which preceded accompanied by a complete duality in civilisation as between Moslems and Hindus. This remains though the power of both religions is weakening.  b .Since the rise of Congress -and Moslem fear and jealosy of Congress has increased quite naturally in view of the absolute claim of Congress to represent India by virtue of its majority position.  c .Geographical r -id strategic factors division  i . Unfortunately Moslem minorities are splintered almost everywhere throughout the sub-continent although they predominate in the North-west.  ii . There cm be no doubt that partlywith an eye to the North-west Frontier and Russia behind it and partly as a result of its interest in the Moslem Middle East Britain has taken special care to protect Moslem susceptabilities and to ensure that the North-west Pro vinces of India in particular shall remain loyal to the Crown.  10. HO CAN INDIES RELIGIOUS PHD POLITICAL DIVISIONS BE BRIDGED SO AS TO lifeKB POSSIBLE A GENUINE INDIAN FEDERATION  NOT Why not let the Indians settle the Indian problem among themselves  Outllne of mswer.  From neither of the at present dominant Indian parties - Congress and the Moslem League -can any advance in this direction be anticipated. Congress has no policy for bridging India s divisions. It is in itself completely disunited as regards constructive political plans and maintains n unity only on the platform of first eliminating the British and second of establishing itself as the all-dominating all-India party.  The Moslem League equally has no policy for bridging Indian differences. Its present strength is derived simply faora its outright opposition to Congress' second aim. Recently in its  Pakistan project it has advocated secession by the Northern  primarily Moslem states of India from the south with c view to establishing a Moslem majority dominance in the north quite as unqualified as the dominance which the Congress majority claims for itself throughout the whole of India. In fact until new political blocks or movements appear little pro-gross can be looked for. Meanwhile it should be remembered that the great majority of Indians are assisting in -end in the main economically profiting from -war production end other aspects of the Empire s war effort. As the war in the Far East develops Indie s position both as an ersenal end as a training ground will increase in importance. India will in feet take a much more vital part in the present war than it did in the last and in this process it is quite likely that new groups of responsible opinion will arise and crystallise into effective political forms. The most promising signs of this   The letters of this word stand for those northern provinces which the Moslem League wishes to see severed from the south., Pege -7  are seen in the activities of Mr. Rr.jagopele.ch&ri's following of dissident Congressmen in conjunction with the Indian Liberals end with the leaders of Labour the depressed classes and of near-Ccmnunist groups all of which are supporting the prosecution of the war. 11. WHAT RESULTS V/OULD FOLLOW -IN PARTICULAR FOR THE UNITED NATIONS' WAR EFFORT --IF BRITAIN V/BRE TO HAND OVER THE GOVBRHMEiiT OF INDIA TO TH5 CONGRESS LEADERS HOW  NOT Why not let India make its own spontaneous contribution to the war  Outline of 'nswer. a . At the very least the organization of India s war effort as regards both recruitment and training of men end the manufacture and transport of arms would be gravely dis turbed. The very imminent danger -even without the fact -of civil war anc attempted seccession by the main Moslem Provinces  and perhaps also of the stronger States would involve a call on India s military resources for police work in the danger areas thus diminishing India s contribution to the war. cj. This fee-. together with the ambiguous attitude of the Congress leaders towards the threet of Japanese aggression would certainly tempt Japan to intensify its direct milit ary attec ' on In .it. as well as Its subversive attacks on India from within. d . Even if the often predicted civil war did not follow a British evacuntioi . India would certainly remain open in view of its politically and economically undeveloped state x.o penetrati.ns by other great indus ri and military powers -China or America r Russia or all three. It is hard to believe the t such new intruders would for long be any more popular with the Indiaois than the British have been. The reel problem for India is not simply to get freedom from Britain but to establish its freedom within a international system viich can secure India s individual development. Aad whatever the future may hold in store the British Ccmr.onwc-ulth is one -and perhaps vhe most - promising nucleus for such a system. 12. 7/HAT ARE. ON PRESENT EVIDENCE TtfpjMS POLITICAL PROSPECTS AT THE END OF THE WAR  NOT Row much longer will Britain dangle promises of eventual freedom for India Outline of Answer. a . The Cripps offer stands tnat is to say once an Indian constituent body whose composition was suggested in the Cripps proposals can decide on the form of Constitution acceptable to all considerable Indian parties the future freedom of India is assured -whether in the form of a Federal Union or of a. number of self-dependent states each within the frameoo-k of the British Commonwealth. Failing such an agreement a new solution will have to be proposed by Great Britain- very likely in conjunction with the U.S.A. It is cor.cefva.ble that these two powers might wield an interim mandate pending the emergence of a political grouping capable of assuming the responsibilities, V0 0  of ovemEient. But such sn interim solution v/ould be both dagrecling to Indie and fraught with difficulties end vexations for the nmndetory powers. Thus from the stand point not only of Greet Britain end of Irdie. itself but else of other nations interested in the peaceful solution of world problems there is every reason for making the cost genuine efforts to ensure that the fripos offer is speedily accepted and implemented. b . Defenders of the continu.rnce of British rule in India have in the past emphasised the fact of Indi-. fB inability to defend itself from aggression without British military and naval rid. To-day however it is generally recognised that self-defence -like freedom -is only possible within a continental if not global security system. As a result of the developments which India hss undergone during the present war it could certainly become -on the strength of its own resources -a leading member of any  Council of Asia .]