[% H ARCHIVES  I Ml o  jrzzi o \n FILE NUMBER SUBJECT HISTORY 31 PART I SOE GROUP B TRAINING SYLLABUS VOLUME FROM 1943 TO 1 944  '.'A.iV, GRQjP B SYLLABUS  Opening Address . A .1. A 2. A.3 .A.4. A.5. A .6 . A .7. A.8. A.9. A 10. A.il A.12. f.13. A .Revision. A.14. A .15. A. 15 w/x A .15 . A .17. A .Rev is ion. A .18. A .19 . A .20 . A .Revision. A .21. A .22. A .Revision. A.Revision. A .23 . Introduction to Course. Individual Security. Informant Service.  Cover . Interrogations. Operational Orders.  Know your Enemy.  Surveillance.  Internal Communications I  Internal Communications II Premises. Security and Premises for W/T Operator W/T Operator. External Communications.  Organisation. Cell System. Security of Organisation.  Recruiting. Discipline and Morale.  Final Address .  Burglary. Lock-picicing. Selection of Dropping Points and Reception Arrange ments. To be given on instructions from xxmdon.  3 .L Handcuffs. -B.S Pigeons c 1/2 German Counter espionage. fa .Civil fb .Military C.3. German Uniformed Police. C.4. National police -e.g. of France Belgium etc.  Given according to student's destination. The Nazi Party and its Formations in Occupied Territory. C.6/7. Recognition of German Troops by weapons and equipment C .8 Recognition of German Troops by uniforms. C. 9 . Military Intelii nce Deports C . 10 . Handling of Gorman Light Weapons C.ll. Epidiascope -pictorial revision of German Weapons. C .12 . -do- German Police ........and Armed Forces Uniforms. D.l. Morale Warfare. D.2/3 Methods of Morale War-far... D.4/5 Subversion of enemy troops. D.6. Instructions for Foreign Workers in Germany. D.7. Passive Resistance in Occupied Countries D.8. Current German Propaganda to Europe. D.9. Tasks Preparatory to Allied arrival. E. Introduction -Playfair or Multi-alphabet Inhocent natter Double Transposition setter One-time Pad Mental Pad Mental W.O.Z. Systems 2 -4 or 5 Mental Indicator Identity Prefixes Security Checks Letter Opening Secret Inks and Code 53.  Given according to individual requirements as notified by C/S. Ate to, SECURITY TALK.   To be givon by IIouso Corin .'.andants to all students on arrival .  II'TTRODUCTIOi .  This Is the most important part of your training . You will therefore in your own interest bo subject to strict security rules .  GiSTE&IL SECURITY PRECAUTIONS .  a. You will not bo allowed to 'leave course unless accdmpanlod. or specially instructed to do so. I. This' does not apply to British Officers under going non-operational training. ii. House Commandants may use their discretion about recreational walksj if in doubt tfcu y should refer to tho Security Officer. b. You must never disclose at any time to anyone that you have boon at this School or-at Beaulieu .' c. You must novor recognise anyone whom you have met hero If you happen to meet them later on olso'/horo except on official business. LOCAL SECURITY RULES.  a. You will hand -to mo all identity documents now in your obsaoasiiOxi-for ins-gocliTon. Payoooks will bo retained by mo during the course .  b. You will hand to mo any firearms other weapons cameras or notebooks in your possession for retention during the course. c. You will hand to me any money in excess of & and any valuables for safekeeping until your departure. If you w to retain more than this sum you must obtain permission through mo from the Area Commandant. Failure to comply with this rule will bw regarded as contributory nogllgo-nce in the event of any loss. Any loss of kit or personal property must bo reported to mo immediately. d. Mail. i. Outgoing. All letters will be handed to mo in a stamped unsea-lod onvclope for censoring. You must not maLV any reference in your letters to the fact that they arc -censored. You will use tho Postal Box address already given .to you or-the special arrangomonts for writing ovorsoas.  Your letters will bo posted in London  ii. Incoming. All lottors s-ont to Yfnn uill 0 5legrams . of urgency Telegrams which may only bo sent in cases will be handed to mo for censorship and despatch. f. Telephono. You will not uso the' tolenhono hern nr in tho only relaxed in special cases whore to urgently with a studout pormissi, -a t   1 ..X  must bo obtained fro 'i the Gormifiriciant and tho-student  brought to 31R to use tho closed lino.  axereisos. Before going out on oxorcisos you will hand to mo any operational documents that may bo in your possession. If the oxorcisc takes place in a town you must t properly dressedj and/in addition to your own current identity document you will bo issued with a. Security Pa6a  in a scaled envelope which you will show to anv official  who starts questioning you. You will hand the pass back  to mo after the exorcise  h. Chan ing Monoy. You arc strictly forbidden to change 5 notes oi higher denominations while he.ro or in the local towns. You should hand them to me for changing. Take a note of tho numbers.  Notebooks . You will be issued with officia.1 registered nofebooks / You mu t safeguard those and not leave them aboutj whon not in use they must be put away. They will bo handed in to' mo before your departure and you will be able to obtain them by applying to your Section. It is not forbidden to ta.kc rough notes on other paper and then transfer thorn to our1official notebook but all such notes must bo destroyed and 'no notebooks other than the official ones will bo obtainoble by you after the course is finished  Any secret papers o.g. rough notes code workings exorcise instructions must bo destroyed or handed to me  for disposal as soon as you have hiusdshod n™ You will'not speak to any members of the staff here except  Instructors or myself xhout yoiir job or your training  4. COl'CLUSION. In the field you will need first-class security. Prepare b t yourself by maintaining it no1. while you are''in training.  -oOo-, OPENIMG ADDREiS. OBJEOT. Subversion. The ob ct of this organisation is subversion. Subversion is as important a weapon in modern warfare as the Army Navy or Air Force. Its main objects are -  A. To damage ensany's material and means of communication and production B. To strain his resources of man-power C. To undermine his morale and that of his collaborators B. To raise the morale of the occupied countries OPERATIONAL METHODS AVAILABLE. Reference to four objectives. A is covered by SABOTAGE which can be suh-divi ad into four headings viz   - Passive Resistance. Act . entailing virtually no rish such as non-co-operation -making en my s life uncomfortable -creating extra work by over-caution excessive zeal reporting non-existent bombs parachutistr etc. ii. Industrial Sabot ago Acts entailing same risk such as a . German factories. b . Gorman factorieso c . functions -e.g lubrication. d . over-liibcrication massive attention to safety regulations etc. iii. Single Acts of Sabotage. ' Isolated acts of definite destructi' a entailing considerable risk to perpetrator varying from s 11 acts such as tyro slashing to destruction of important bridge power station transformer etc. iv. Mass Sabotage.. Largeseal co-ordinated attac s on enemy communications and concentrations also destruction of objects of considerable importance to the enemy both industrial and military. This .ojuld b timed to coined .o with some outstanding event e.g nvasion and could only be carried out by careful planning and efter much preparation. Illustration of what could ba accomplished on TD' day by an Organiser in an impox-tSEt strategic town near the coast of Ruritsnia., 0 At Octt 43 -2-  B is also oov ered by SABOTAGE i. Civilian. Dairage caused by isolated acts must either be repaired or else ecen will be deprived of some indispensable service. This strains his industrial resources already stretched to full capacity to replace war losses. Acts of sabotage usually call for more sentries guards and sometimes even police battalions in areas attacked. 0 and B. ore brought about by PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE. This is a form of warfare not yet fully developed which attacks the enemy s will to war and his spirit of resistance. Not to be confused with Propaganda which is only one of the weapons employed. a. P W. employs the whole scale of tones ranging from persuasion to methods of intimidation creation of panic etc. and seeks to sap eneny's discipline and will to fight and to cause demoralisation desertion etc. P.W. has three main targets although others may present thornselvosj i. Morale of enemy s armed farces. ii. Trojan Horse. The seven million foreign workers in Germany are the rer secret army'' right in the heart of the enemy s country who only need to be trained and co-ordinated. Their activities until an actual breakdown in Germany occurs will necessarily be confined to - Indetectable sabotage -spreading gloom and defeatist talk among the German Yorkers and population  After the breakdown in Germany has occurred it may be possible to give them a more active role. ill. Quisling administrations in occupied countries. Any collaborator is fni gome. If Germans have to take ove administration themselves -e.g. Denmark this will stil further strain their resources.  5 b. Conversely one of the objects of P.W is to re-moralise and vo build up the fighting spirit of the conquered populations in preparation for the tasks which await them when the hour of th ir liberation approaches. Naturally the news of Allied sucoess s very largely accomplishes this but the process can be hastened by the application of suitable methods., 0 0cc ' -  c  -6 YOUI PUT ]ES  a .All subversive activities co-ordinated and directed in accordance with one general policy and plan this is essential otherwise the results would bo confused and ineffective. This vast organisation no / supplies trained person.ro 1 arms explosives communication facilities information and funds throughout dll the occupied countries.  b .Your duty is to carry out task allotted to you. You are an important cog in a huge machine. If you neglect your task for another you will cause some portion of the plan to fail and you may seriously interfere with the work of another and unknown colleague in the field.  c .You cannot do this without task. It will be your arty during the next weeks to study the whole technique of underground life i.o. the security measures which anybody from the simplest operation upwards must observe and also every method of organisation. Warning against relaxing security in the field -tendency to relax precautions after the first month or two -the time to beware - Sonnet guarantee your safety in the iloJLd but if you carry out faithfully  all your teaching here there should be little elmrice of your being caught. Remember the best agents arc never caught the stupid and especially the careless ones arc . oOo, r  OPENING ADDRESS.  First of all let me bid you welcome. I hope that you will enjoy your Course here and will find it helpful to you.  Now let's get to work. The purpose of the Organisation to which you and I belong is Subversion. Subversion properly applied is one of the most potent weapons one can use. It is the fourth arm in moderryfaarfare . What are its objects They are fourfold. I will give you these four headings and I should like you to pay particular attention to them as they are going to govern most of what I am going to say to you this morning.  In the first place the objective is to damage the enemy's material to the maximum extent and also all his means of communication and production. Modem warfare is almost entirely dependent on material and communications. With every successive war there is an increasing emphasis on machines and equipment so much so that no country without considerable industry at its call can now dream of making war on a large scale. Therefore if you destroy as many machines as possible and damage the means of production you have gone a long way in hampering the enemy's effort.   The second objective is to strain the enemy's resources  WT man-power. Towards the end of any long war the question of man-power grows every day more vital. The Germans at this moment are combing all their industries for men to put into the field and trying to replace them by foreign labour. Every General seeks to employ the maximum amount of his resources at the vital point of attack or danger. If a sufficient force can be diverted to provide sentries police etc. the enemy's main force is thereby weakened.  The third objective is to undermine the morale of the enemy. In any long war the question of morale becomes an increasing anxiety to leaders on both sides. If the morale of one side cracks they lose the war however many troops they may have left. In the Autumn of 1918 the German troops were no longer fighting in the same way as they had been previously. Why was that Partly because they were getting hungrier every day partly because they were getting tired of being kicked round by their N.C.O's -you can stand that on a full stomach but it is not so easy on an empty one -partly because   hey were getting misery letters from their people at home. The lk rale of the German army was cracking and in consequence the German  rmy cracked. Anything we can do to help along this process during  the present war is going to help to shorten it. There are plenty of methods. We must not forget also the question of the Quislings the collaborators. We want them also to feel thoroughly uncomfortable.  Finally there is the converse of this to raise the morale of the populations of the Occupied countries in order that they may give us vital assistance when the right moment comes.  How do we achieve all this There are plenty of methods to produce all the effects we seek to bring about.  Damage to the enemy's material and means of production is of course achieved by sabotage. Now there are various kinds or degrees of sabotage and we can put these in an ascending scale. There are at least four stages.  First of all.there is the form of sabotage known as Passive Resistance -anEnumerable series of small acts which entail virtually no risk to the perpetrators. The main principle is non-co-operation -making the enemy feel that while you are keeping within the letter of his law you are not in the least won over by him and are only waiting your chance to liberate yourselves. The enemy's life in Occupied countries should be made as thoroughly uncomfortable as possible. He should be made to feel an alien in a hostile environment. The Boche is an emotional creature who cannot  stand too much dislike.  A, -2-   All sorts of extra work can be created for him by over caution and especially by excessive zeal. The sort of zeal that sends him anonymous denunciations of his collaborators that sends him in reports of non-existent unexploded bombs elusive parachutists etc. etc. If the thing is properly worked he need never suspect that he is being made a fool of.  The second stage we may call industrial sabotage.1 Here there is some risk to the perpetrators but it is no excessive. In the first place anything which can be done t o SelmiSn factories is all to the good. As we have said the Boche is anxious to recruit all the foreign labour he can in order to release his own men for the Army. Let us try to stop that. But one may as well take advantage of the fact that the workers will undoubtedly continue to flock to Germany whether as volunteers or as sonscripts by including amongst them agents recruited specially for the purpose of starting sabotage in German factories. Here the possibilities are immense. The Germans claim to have already millions of foreign workers in Germany and only a very small percentage of these workers can really wish Germany to win the war.  In the third place a great deal of damage can be done Wk. factories and workshops by omitting to carry out certain essential  functions such as lubricating or by substituting some abrasive  for the real lubricant.  Lastly workers can also hold up German production by a measurable percentage by causing waste and delay and by excess of zeal or by over-caution. One can insist on a pedantic adherence to regulations or ask for frequent renewals and overhauls of machinery Mso as to produce the best results . Too much time can be spent on doing any one job. One can always appear to insist upon an unnecessarily high standard. If every worker in every Geiman factory were to leave his bench for the purposes of nature for double the usual period the effect on production would be quite measurable . One can also waste precious lubricants by over-lubrication and in time by too much attention to the safety regulations.  The third stage in sabotage might be calledrminor  sabotage that is isolated acts of definite destruction such as growing up a bridge an electric transformer wrecking power lines etc. wese do of course entail very considerable risk to the perpetrators  but they have definite nuisance value.  Lastly we come to sabotage on the grand scale - major sabotage let us call it. This might involve the destruction of whole lengths of railway bridges and roads in any given area. Naturally there can be no attempt at concealment of these once they had occurred although they would naturally be prepared under extreme secret conditions. They can only be accomplished by organised saboteur squads and they would be timed to coincide with some big event such as invasion. So much for sabotage.  Now is that all that sabotage can accomplish No. Successful sabotage also has the effect of straining the enemy s resources of man-power. This is effected in at least two different ways. All this faulty workmanship in factories which we have detailed needs putting right. It is not merely a question of duplicating labour -it may be far worse than that -a definite damage to the machine may have occurred by this careless lack of lubrication for instance. Every attack which is made on rolling stock and especially locomotives must be the very devil for the enemy s repair shops which a re already congested. In this way the enemy s resources of civilian man-power are being wasted.  But there is another aspect as well. Whenever a major act of sabotage occurs the Gestapo swarm all over the district to make enquiries and they nearly always result in recommendations for, -3   increased guards on these or other points. The more extra sentries we can get posted at points we do not intend to attack the better. If we can get whole police battalions diverted to certain areas it is better still.  How do we set about undemining the morale of enemy troops Well there are several methods of political subversion about which you will get details during the next few weeks. It is no good trying to plant downright falsehoodeon enemy troops you have no right to expect them to swallow but you can work on grievances which they already have. You can fan their dissatisfaction with their conditions and also the anxiety they must feel for their relations in North German towns which have been heavily blitzed by the R.A.F. You can play on the feeling of loneliness some of their troops must xjierience in remote stations and on the terror they must feel at berhg stabbed in the back by the foreign population they are holding in check when the day arrives. And you can make them almost sob at the thought of all they are being deprived of  Lastly you can raise the morale of the population of the occupied countries by various forms of propaganda which  re being used at this moment in every German Occupied country  very day of the year. The object of this propaganda is to unify . population in a common hatred of the Boche. Arising out of this there should come the sort of non-co-operation with him which is so important to us  0ne can implant in them a conviction aciounting to certainty that the Allies will win -from that should spring an active desire to help that victory forward.  These then are the objects which we seek to attain by subversion and I have just detailed some of the methods by which they can be achieved. It is obvious however that all these effects will be hap-haz ard and therefore largely wasted if they are not all bound up in a general plan which covers all activities and times them all to fit in like a railway schedule. Each single act of sabotage o propaganda or of political subversion ought to be part of a definite plan of attack.  tThe plan naturally varies with each country and there re several factors which govern it. There is first of all naturally military strategy for all our subversive efforts are governed by what the main plan of attack may be -aricj. subversion is only one part of a very large whole. It is nouse laying on an ambitious plan of sabotage for a country which the High Command has decided at the last moment not to attack -tinless it is a deliberate plan of diversion.  It is naturally also influenced by the German economic situation. For instance one of the main German weaknesses at the moment is communications and that is why they are so constantly attacked both by the R.A.F. and saboteurs. Then there is the question of the political situation. The relations between the Allies and some so-called neutral countries are so delicate that no subversive operations can be contemplated in those countries for the time being even though it is apparent that they may be the next on the list for attack by the Germans. There is also the nature of the country to be considered -the density of its population and the degree of industrialisation. It is obvious that the plan for small densely populated and highly Industrailised countries such as Belgium and Holland would be different from that for the deserts of Libya -if there is one. PLastly the attitude of the civil population may make a considerable d/ifference to the plan., -4-   In some countries secret organisations already exist in fairly large numbers and they may have to be taken into consideration. The attitude of some Occupied countries is far moie virile than that of others who are inclined to lie down and do nothing about it. In some parts of the country there may even be an active pro-Nazi element. All these factors have to be weighed.  The general policy in whatever country you may he sent to can he divided into two phases -the pre-invasion phase and the invasion phase. Let us take the pre-invasion phase first.  The first essential is to organise each country area hy area. Naturally the organisation in each country will vary enormously according to factors of geography population and industry so that no two countries will he entirely alike. For the same reasons the organisation inside each area may be extremely simple or on the other hand it may he a fairly complex organisation closely knit together. In addition to the factors I have already mentioned there is the dominating factor of the German C.E. control. It is their activities which mostly dictate what kind of organisation one can stage. Then there is the question of the native organisations already working inside the country -the so-called secret armies. Here again the policy varies so much from country to country and according to the run of the war that it is impossible to lay down any universal principle. In some countries organisers may beViasked to go out as pioneers and organise some guerilla bands with objectives to he attacked when the day comes. In other countries agents are sent out regularly to form part of the powerful secret organisations already existing and to fill nifcches in those organisations such as arms instructors sub-area organisers W/T operators etc. Yet in other countries the organisation of which you form a part functions entirely separately from these organisations which are probably too well known to the Boche. But even in these cases some attempt must be made to take note of these local societies and to assess their value.  Naturally most of your activities will form a preparation for the great day when your countries come to be liberated and the invasion phase should therefore see your activities at maximum stretch. Everything depends on the secrecy and efficiency with which these preparations are made. The more that each separate operation can be prepared and even possibly rehearsed the better it is likely to go off when the day comes.  Here again the operational orders naturally vary considerably for each country so that it is impossible to lay down any universal plan to apply to all countries. Nevertheless the activities some part of which you will probably be asked to prepare for will include such things as  a . A whole series of combined attacks on the enemy's rail road and telecommunications. If for instance it were possible to isolate completely for even 48 hours a vital strategic centre 50 miles behind the enemy's lines just at the moment when the Allies were landing just think what a gift this would be to the Allied commander. If it were impossible for the enemy to get his troops up to the threatened spot at the right moment because his communications were temporarily sabotaged it might make all the difference to the success or failure of the operations -in that sector  at all events., -5   b .Demolishing important river bridges enemy's communications. Or conversely preventing the enemy from doing so when he wishes to prevent the Allies from advancing. The campaign of 1940 in the Low Countries shewed what tragic results to the defence can result from a single important bridge failing to be demolished. And it is about time that the Germans had some of their own medicine. c .Attacks on enemy H.Q's telephone vans etc. A small gang of disciplined men can very soon deal with even an important enemy H.Q . if the operation is thoroughly studied and planned beforehand. If the sentries are attacked at exactly the right moment and the men in the guard-room overwhelmed one can very soon over run a whole building by running down the corridors and throwing bombs or grenades in each room. They are fairly effective weapons in those conditions. d .Blocking roads which must be used but care must be taken not to block roads which may be required by the advancing Allies. It has been rightly pointed out that it is impossible to block any road for more than a certain time. Nevertheless if the enemy had to vacate a town at a moment's notice with a large amount of transport and then have tj deal with road blocks or possibly road craters it spay make all the difference to them more especially if the sky then fililglwith bombing aeroplanes which lea e-them no respite. e .The question of the civil population one for it was their action in pouring out on to all the roads before the advancing Germans in 1940 that seriously handicapped the Allies in their attempts to deal with the German invasion. Here again detailed plans will be worked out in due course to tell the civil population what they can do to help and especially what they can avoid doing to hinder. wo doubt the B.B.C. will play a large part in this but one cannot rely on the civilian population having r gjivers in an area threatened by invasion and it may well be your services may prove extremely useful in coping with an urgent problem of this kind. /i/here does the organiser fit into all these schemes The organiser is the key man in all of them and it is on his work and organisation that the smooth carrying out of all the plans depends. You will have seen enough from what I have told you to realise that any one organiser has only a very small part -although an important one -in a vast organisation and that any work he carries out is only a minute part of a big general plan. You will therefore appreciate the absolute necessity of team work. Too much individualism on the part of any one organiser might go far to wreck the plan. The roles of the organiser are various. More often than not he is sent into the field with a specific mission to carry oijjt. He may be given a target to demolish he may be asked to fea ment industrial unrest in a particular area he may be asked to organise a small guerilla band in a certain district. On the other hand he may be sent out as a pioneer with instructions to organise, -6   a certain area. In that case he starts from scratch. He will have to make a survey of his area and decide what are the most suitable targets to attack and what type of organisation is best adapted to the purpose. If he is working not to far from this country and is in fairly close touch he will probably report back either by iv/T or by letter or more likely still return on a short visit. On the other hand if the spot to which he goes is at the other end of the earth.we may not see him back again before the end of the war and he will have to use his own initiative throughout. It is obvious he can do none of these things unless he is properly trained and equipped for his task. That is why you have come to Beaulieu. During the next .... eeks you will have the task of studying the underground life &&& every aspect starting with the moment at which you arrive on the ground and disengage yourself from your parachute. You will have to learn how to bury it safely and to start your new life in your new surroundings. e shall be discussing with you every hind of measures for your own safety -the importance of having the right story to tell the right kind of job to do and how to lead your life most in accordance with those facts. We shall teach you how to build up your organisation from zero. There is only one word of warning I wish to make here. If you follow conscientiously in the field all that we teach you here we cannot guarantee your safety but we think that your chance of being picked up is very small. Remember that the best agents are never caught. But some agents when they get out into the field find it apparently much easier than they expected and they are inclined to relax their precautions. That is the moment to beware of. Never relax your precautions and never fool yourself by thinking that the enemy are asleep. They may be watching you all the time so watch your step., OPENING ADDRESS   Foreign Workers .  1. OBJECT. Subversion. The object of this Organisation is subversion.  Subversion is as important a weapon in modern warfare as the  Army Navy or Air Force. Its main objects are -   A. To damage enemy's material and means of communication and production. B. To strain his resources of man-power C. To undermine his morale and that of his collaborators D. To raise the morale of the occupied countries 2. PRESENT SITUATION.  a .The eight million foreign workers for enemy are the real 'secret army' in the heart of the enemy's country and constitute a grave weakness for the enemy in crises and therefore an Allied opportunity.  b .Naturally Germans will take use of the Foreign Worker and will doubtless make it as difficult as possible for us.  c .The present comparative lack F.W. and the necessity of starting this as soon as possible. This is the primary task of all non-German agents going to Germany. 3. YOUR MISSION.  a .The eventual tasks to be performed communicated by wireless by the High Command.  b .Meanwhile the present conditions feats of sabotage or resistance impossible and undesirable .  c .Your-lfirst and most important and conserve an organisation among your fellow countrymen in Germany capable of carrying out the orders of the High Command. Maximum security of organisation essential.  d .After this has been done need not compromise your organisation are i . 'go-slow' tactics in the factories  ii . indetectable sabotage  iii . demoralisation tactics Psychological Warfare .   e .Method.  i .You will in Germany are out of the question and make your own way to the area where you are to work.  ii .It is before you leave. They are almost certain to be fellow-countrymen they should put you into the picture as to the local conditions in your area and find you lodging and employment., -2    iii . Some of you may act as your own V//T in other cases a separate W/T will go with you. For the first month after your arrival there will probably be no sheds' but after that they will increase gradually as your work gets under way.   iv . A certain number of W/T operators are being given the organisers' course in case they have to take over the organiser's job in the event of casualties.  4. WHAT IS PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE  a .Object of all warfare enemy. This entails breaking his will to resist.  b .P.W. seeks to break the employing the whole scale of tones from persuasion to methods of intimidation creation of panic etc. The immediate objectives are demoralisation desertion etc.  c .P.W. cannot function substantial victories or considerable war-weariness on the part of the enemy. The present moment is therefore ripe on both counts. P.W. seeks to exploit and intensify the effects of both much as a reflector intensifies the light of a searchlight.  d .If the enemy's morale that of the Italians the war would have been over in September in fact it is the one factor which is keeping the war going. The enemy is therefore extremely sensitive to all forms of attack on his morale.  e .Any wholesale split lead to instant collapse of his war effort. This is bound to occur sooner or later e.g. July 20th. It might be sooner If it could be organised. 5. SECURITY. The object of this course is to teach you   a . Security  b . Secret organisation.  a .Difference between ordinary security -a new way or system of living in which every action Is calculated.  b .Impossibility of organising security. Warning against relaxing security in the field -tendency to relax precautions after the first month or two -the time to beware -We cannot guarantee your safety in the field but if you carry out faithfully all your teaching here there should be little chance of your being caught. Remember the best agents are never caught the stupid and especially the careless ones are1'., INTRODUCTION TO COURSE  OBJECT OF INSTRUCTION.  In this course you will he given the final instruction to assist you in living in enemy occupied territory in carrying out subversive work recruiting organising and instructing your compatriots to help you.  The' course falls into two parts -Lectures and practical Exorcises .   Care must be taken not to mention instruction which the student is not going to have.  LECTURES.  There are approximately sixty-five of those depending on your requirements. They fall into five classes  i. S S . and C E . ii. Specialist iii. Enemy iv. Morale v. Codes There are four lectures every day except Sunday The first is at 09 30 the second at 10 30 and the third at  11.30. There is an afternoon lecture at 17.15. Each lecture lasts 45 -50 minutes and ample time is allowed for questions. Avoid interrupting the lecturer unless it is essential. Do not hesitate to ask questions at the end. Be sure that you have extracted all the information you possibly ca.n it is not only a question of acquiring knowledge but of having it immediately available so as to be able'to instruct others. 1    A LECTURES -S S andC E.  S.5. and C E. Lectures will be given you by give name ol 'A' Lecturer who specialises in your country. These lectures deal with methods of safe-guarding yourself and your organisation of-combating the enemy contreespionago and the problem of loading a double life. You will bo taught how to build up a secret organisation. The position of the secret agent is viewed both from his own stand point and from that of the Polico. The lectures are based on the principles of subversive life and the experience gained by various agents not only in your own country but from all parts of the world.  It is not possible to forosoa all problems which may arise for any individual agent but the principles and precautions taught here if diligently followed and where necessary adopted should enable the agent to surmount the difficulties most likely to come his way. Give brief details of 'A' Lectures.  .B1 LECTURES jBpecialist Lectures. These lectures will bo given you by give name of   iJ lecturer . They deal with specialist subjects such as Burglary Lock-picking Handcuff-picking Pigeons. After each of these lectures time will bo allowed for practice.v, A 1  5  C LSCTUTiES -Enemy Forces .  These lectures will be given you by give name of 'C Lecturer .  In all fo.rms of warfare it is necessary to study your enemy. In subversive work your chief opponents are the enemy police and C E . services. Knowledge of them will enable you to assess the dangers-which confront you it will give you a basis for devising practical precautions it will increase your confidence and that of your associates.  In addition you will make a brief study of the enomy armed forces such as will enable you to recognise the different kinds of enemy troops. This will apply most directly to those engaged in combating para-military forces. All may derive profit from it however as some general acquaintance with the subject is necessary to show long residence under German occupation furthermore particular knowledge will enable you to pass on military Information needed by tho Allied Command.  6 LECTURES -Morale Warfare .  Those lectures will bo given you by give name of 'D' Lecturer .  Thoy deal mainly with destructive subversive propaganda which can bo sown by agents. In addition there is one lecture on positive tasks to bo undertaken by the civilian population prior to Allied arrival and one lecture on Gorman propaganda in your country.  Morale Warfare is dealt with here because  I. Some agents have propaganda missions ii. Some agents arc given a secondary mission concerned with this subject. ill. All agents should know the main llpros of Allied instructions to the civilian population  iv. Agents may be able to counteract the effects of onomy propaganda if thoy know something of its mothods.  'E LECTURES -Codes Ciphers and Secret writing.  These lectures will be given you by give namo of 'E Locturor .  They doal with the secret means of communications which enable you to communicate with your section from your country to London.  You will bo provided with code and cipher systems suited to your requirements. Carolese or improper us.o of codes or ciphers may have disastrous consequences. Accuracy and spoed must bo achieved and this can only bo done'after much practice.  8. EXERCISES . I. Your exercisos will be carried out under the supervision of give namo. of Duty Officer who also acts as liaison between you'and our H.Q ., A 1   o   iit You will havo at loast one exorcise every day except Sundays. It will take place either between 1400 hours and 1600 hours or aftor dinner -sometimes both -as required. There are also some exercises which take a longer period. Thoy are designed to bring out the principles of security as taught in the lectures and depend for their value on your fullest co-operation. You must use your imagination and  concentrate.   Doseribc two or throe typical exorcises e.g Identity Parade Burglary Following Contacting. .  iii. You will have several interrogations which may telco place at any time aftor you ha.vo carried out an exorcise in which you have been absent from this school and thoso grounds. Your Duty Officer will givo you rules for this Exorcise after your Interrogation Lecture. iv. After your Course some of you will be sent on a 96 hours Scheme You will bo sent to various towns in England with false British Identity Papers and will have to live and work there as agents. Your Duty Officer will give you the necessary information for this Scheme. 9 CONCLUSION.  In general you havo only four locturos and one exorcise a day. Therefore there is plenty of time to be occupied in  a writing up your notes  b reading information files on your country which your Duty Officer will give you  c Listening to broadcasts from your country  d Discussing the problems raised in the loctures and thinking out questions which you can put to instructors.  All Instructors are here to help you if ever you need their help outside of Lecture hours you havo only to ask your Duty Officer who will make the necessary arrange  ments  \ -- o0o-, 3.3AM C.E. LECTURES.  These lectures must be consifiered as key lectures giving the principlesof security as they would ap ply to an agent working in an occupied country.  The Instructors responsible lo-r'giving these lectures are divided into 1 Country' Groups the Instructors being selected lor their knowledge of the Country concerned. This knowledge is further built up and kept up to date by specialised study of all available information obtained from interviews with returned agents occasional attachments to 0/S and information sent by the C/S concerned. Thus each Instructor specialises in one country and adapts the key lectures to this country passing on to the students only such parts of the key lecture together with detailed information -as apply to the student's particular country. These lectures fall roughly into three groups  1. General Security. A.2 -11 2. Communications -A.12 17 3. Organisation A.18 -22 1 GENERAL SECURITY A.2 A. 11. This group of lectures is untended to train the agent to defend himself and his colleagu.es against the German and Quisling  C.E. services. Although the basic principles of security are the same for all countries their detailed application needs to be varied considerably according to the country in which the student is going to live and work. Cover or alibis for example present a different problem in France from that which confronts a Belgian or Polish agent. Regulations and controls are also very different and are further complicated in France by the division of the country into two parts. In addition the attitude of the various National Police Forces and National Administrations vary considerably. Further' the tactics of the Gormans also vary enormously from the comparatively mild occupation of Denmark to the ruthless partition and enslavement of Poland. All this greatly influences agent technique for any particular country.  2. COtMUNICATIONS. A.12 -A. 17. Although the security problems of clandestine communications are the same as regards general principles the application of these has to be varied not only according to the degree of control etc. in the country to which the agent is going but also to/the particular job he has to do. For instance an agent who is going to have a wireless operator needs guidance as to his respon sibilities towards his operator whereas the wireless operator and sub-agents need instruction regarding the difficulties of the organiser. Furthermore moans of communicating and personal meetings which are safe and useful in one country are often dangerous in another e.g Posto Restante is extremely dangerous in France but is currently used in Denmark owing to the reliability of the postal personnel  3. ORGANISATION A.18 -A.22. Here again although the basic principles remain-the same they require to be adapted to the country in which the student is going to work.   he problem of security in a country like Poland whore nearly the whole population is dependable is very different from that in a country which has been heavily penetrated by the Germans, 2  such as Holland or a country like France whore the existence of a Vichy Government created hesitation and division oi loyalty among many good Frenchmen.  Agent management and discipline are also complicated  by national characteristics e.g. French effervescence or in Greece a strong tendency to internal political strife.  Therefore it is essential that any. Instructor using these lectures must not only have a good general background knowledge of the country in which he is lecturing but also keep himself well informed on the methods and difficulties of the subversive organisations working in that country.  -oQo, A. 2. January 44  INDIVIDUAL SECURITY.  1. INTRODUCTION. a Security must be the first consideration of the agent. Unless he has taken the necessary precautions for his own safety it is useless for him to attempt any subversive work alone or in conjunction with other people. .  b Apart from the danger to the individual agent his arrest may jeopardise the safety of an organisation with which he is in contact.  c The agent unlike the soldier vho has many friends is surrounded by enemies seen and unseen. He cannot even be certain of the people of his own nationality who are apparently friendly. The agent must there fore remember that like primitive men in the jungle. he has only his alertness initiative and observation to help him. He has to look after himself but we can prepare him for this by training.  d Despite the apparent difficulties the agent can train himself to be seouri.t - mlnded and by self-discipline make the taking of precautions an automatic process   of. crossing the road .. He should at the same time beware of the danger orf ' over-confidence whan he sees little evidence of measures being taken against him.  2. RULES. The following rules should be studied and followed by the agent and passed on to any one he recruits  a Cover. b Information. c Alertness. d Inoonspicuousness. e. Discretion. f Discipline ix g Planning for emergency.  a Cove'r. It is essential to have a comprehensive cover story for his past and every action and to do nothing which might jeopardise it. This is dealt with in detail in another lecture f ' Vi  b Information. This is the basis of all the agent's work. As much as' 'possible is provided before departure butthe agent must check and supplement it on arrival . 0/ For the purposes of self-protection information will be required on  -t 3Dp Vi 1 'p'  i. Conditions and regulations In the agent's area ii. Enemy methods and personnel' ' c Alertness.  i. The agent cannot rely on the law for protection on the contrary he is opposed tc it and must As depend on alertness and observation e.g. must rf see danger early old friend in the street of policeman checking papers so that he may have time to avcid it., A. E. -a January 44 ii . He should not oM.-y observe things tut also .. . make deductions from them e.g. papers moved suggesting some one has heen in his room a smell of real coffee suggesting some one connected with bl&dlc market familiar voice .. . .eiilan-o or face suggesting that the agent is being Wfollowed nvj ci iOv -Wa..' '.SO 'V1 h -in. Combined with alertness of mind the agent should develop a good memory the ability to remember a face details of instructions plans laid some time previously is an essential requisite fot the agent who should commit as  little as possible to writing  l - .f-v - .. ' d Ihconspiottousness. a J -i pr-i i- ....    T P The1 agent should avoid attracting attention to  Ti  . bn ev-hhiid. i Observing all rales and regulations. Small  08 .i.i nojl-infringements may bring tKe ageht' into contact with the police and may lead to further in vestigations. little danger in this for the r on Kb.. person not engaged in clandestine activity but O W . for the agent it is unnecessary contact with  . ny n. the police. He should . therefore be a . bln' model citizen . n .  ..-cuts ' V.. nomn o ii. Personal behaviour. ' Under this heading con sider physical appearance hands hair etc . clothes friends avoid persons suspected by the police Jews Commvuniats -etc tastes  n 1 -A. /bnn .o oxhe amusements etc. The agent should merge into  -n. 10 3 the background and act in the same way as those around him. This docs not -mean perpetual silence -which might bo even more conspicuous but natural behaviour.1 Build up good reputation be-pleasant to people and avoid annoying them.  ' 'Conform to local conditions Diseretion.   -pvTn-'-  The agent must not give-himself away by carelessness.   p.r /ru-p'i r.fb ' n.a i. -In conversation. The-agent should not xHuJ-ll  confide in friends just to relieve the strain on nerves . 1   8X 'X answer questions in such a way as to arouse  XiC i Jh-'curiosity ' ' / A1 ' b tell people more than they need know no matter how impprtant or how close the association ' t ... - . 'L ' adopt a hush-hush attitude vanity is bisually the cause of this or an atmosphere of importance -h mention facts which he is not supposed to b know '.p1'1-x . .fe. mention isolated facts at .different times  which-cah oe .pfooed together, A. S January 44.  be led into making compromising statements by pro-German remark.  ii. With incriminating agent must not Teavo a'b'out and'f asTar as possible mat'not carry incriminating documents e.g. names addresses notes. Remember that even a tram ticket may in same circumstances be an incriminating document. A daily check of the contents of one s pockets is essential and all unnecessary documents must be destroyed at once. iii. Behaviour. The agent discipline e.g. be able to control his reactions in routine controls or if accidents occur. Practise moderation in drink care in relations with women avoid celebration after success etc. f Discipline.  It is essential to security as well as to efficiency that an agent should obey his chief s orders exactly and without dispute.  g Planning for Emergency.  The agent must foresee emergency and plan in advance the action to be taken.  i. Arrange alternatives misunderstanding e.g alternative R.V. if the first is not kept ii. Prepare for any sudden arranged conversation in talking to colleague in case of. interruption. iii. Prepare signs by which of the fact that he is in danger. iv. Plans must be laid comes under grave suspicion and a suitable hide-out prepared. Any necessary false papers and clothes for this disappearance should be readily available including a reserve' supply of money. Cover story advisable to explain the disappeara ee. Simple disguise. 3. COICLUSIOM. The security precautions outlined above should be put into practice as soon as the agent enters the organisation and  starts his training. Although the danger of German  espionage in this country is not so great all precautions should bo taken. It is also necessary to know how to deal  with friends and other persons who might be curious.  By starting at such an early stage the agent is also getting into the habit of thinking along security lines and preparing himself for his work in the field. He must remember that secrecy even with those nearest to him and in whom he has the most confidence is essential for his safety.  -0O0, A 5. March 43  itormaiiom.  A. INTRODUCTION. Good information is the basis of all subversive activities .  B. INFORI.IATION REQUIRED. 1. Defensive. The following are the main categories of information which you. require.for your own self protection a. Local Conditions. These change rapidly in war' time and you must expect to find many differences after your period of absence e.g. alterations to buildings names of streets transport facilities market days articles unobtainable prices money in circulation recent events local'politics slang  b. Local Regulations. These also change frequently e.g papers required prohibitions. See A S 9 and 10 . e. Enemy C.E. Forces. It is important for you to lenow as much as' 'possible about all enemy C.E. forces including German troops and police and the national police and pro-Nazi organisations their personnel and locations see C lectures and 1 their methods see A. 8 9 and 10. 2. Offensive. The type of information needed for offensiVe activity will vary with the type of operation undertaken but in general it may be grouped as follows a Recruits. See A. 21.   i. b. Targets. C. SOURCES OF INFORMATION. 1. Country Section. You will obtain as much information detailed and accurate -as the Section hals at its disposal. You must however never rest content with this but must check it on arrival and constantly be adding to it. Organisation in Field. The members of the organisation  'yHflTilT onlacF on arrival will be able to give you much valuable information. But it is your res ponsibility to ask them everything that you want to know familiarity with local conditions may cause thorn to omit items of importance to you.  Official Sources. You should make good use of all official sources -e.g. newspapers especially local' the radio posters public libraries.  4 Your Own Observation. Alert observation will bring you many'hiaoTul items of information -e.g. by overhearing conversations reading documents on desks noticing new policemen or military units sensing atmosphere of snap control.   Informants. lO   You should get to know those who are in  a go'od' position to pick up information and form a kind of unofficial infoimant service . Note the following points, A. 3 March 43.  -2   a. Informants should give their-information unwittingly. Therefore you must practise the art of inducing. hij people to talk.  i. You should'avoid putting direct questions they give away what you want to knov . t .vhC ii. You can encourage people to talk hy sh-pwing an interest in their affairs -particularly their grievances or by showing ignorance or by making a false statement or by start 0 ing an argument.  iii. Although a fev/ drinks may be helpful- it .is risky to push this method too far the person may realise afterwards that he has been pumped. . . infoimants should be selected carefully so as to cover a wide area and many different groups and classes..1  i. Some may know a variety of people and hear general gossip -e.g priests doct&rn hotel and cafe proprietors and . employee X Sb.p- - keepers espeeially- those tho paovai.is'kout the town or countryside - e g .pp stmen public utility employees ' A.R. P.j rpf icinls errand-hoyscommercial travellers Itinerant traders shepherds.  ii. Others may -be useful for .informa.ti-en on special'Shh'iects -c.g policemen and .other officials employees of G-erman-controlled.  firms railway and dock workers. Iandlad3.ee ' dressmakers and washerwomen members of ... hatiohal pro-Kazi organisarr ons disgruiitied enemy personnel.  You must be careful to estimate .the varucTof any  . infoimation obtained in .this .way taking into f 1account the informant s' fhc-illties for ascertain ing it his personal'prejudices a possible desire to please you his Intelligence accuracy etc.  Some of jour informants mayp eventually qualify to be recruited as members '6'% .'youfv6r-ganisation. in the Security Section see A 181. It is especially  useful t-bhave. same-ione inthe1 policeorother  local authority. .p  -fc...   If- oO '. / . -V .ITT  '&JL1V.C   TLi ' '1 ' ''r   . r 11/  -A  U00 -r .' ' -. X  T'W i  n -/., A. 4/6  Jgjauary 48. COVE  DEFIMIIIOM. ' V Y.  Your cover is tKe life which you outwardly lead in order to conceal the real purpose of' your presence and the explanation which you give of your past and present. . It is host considered under the heads Past Link between Past and Present Present and Alibis1'  YOURPASS. 'r -y  Before ydtir departure with the assistance of your Section Officers you will probably prepare story of your past life up to the time ofi your arrival. But you cannot always arrange- a complete story1 before leaving furthermore you may have to change part or all of your cover ptoly when you are actually in the field and knew what your circumstances are to be. Nevertheless you must be able to give some account df -'yourself if .questioned immediately after your arrival.  In inventing or amending your 'covoi story or that of another agent the following points should be uonslderod  a. Identity. ybaLb -.// la 1 V-\ i YourOwn. . a. -'A... / ' c-r /o  Advantages Your story will be .mai-J true .L -' I1' 1-j .Only a limited peritd will  l. have to be explained away Records will-confirm ypur statomehts  Disadvantages The subversive part of-ybuf histor ' may b.o.. knom rtp the enemy or 'to joers.ons who may give yoii away   i This is usually the case with escapees. f '  ii That of a Real Person Distant or Dead.  Advantages The story being re..l will be self-oonsist-eht. Recorda-will' cOni i-iui .at least part of it  Disadvantages People acquainted with the person whom you are impersonating ma3 give  -you away. You may have incomplete information about this person's past life so that j our states ments may be shewn to be ' untrue. The person may be suspected Without your knowing it  xix. Wholly Fictitious. Advantages less chance of entanglements and wider scope., 2 A 4/5. ' Jantuary 4S  Disadvantages Records will not confirm your story.  In some cases agents have to assume' different identities in different places. This Should he avoided as far as possible because it leads to L V contradictions. H.B. The danger of two identity cards . ..  b. History. ... 1 J ' i. Whatever your idsntity your story must be plausible and not indicate any connexion with subversive activity . ii. It siiould be based as far as possible on the facts of your own life or that of tihe person whom you are impersonating. Do not introduce places or events which you do not Imow nor refer to knowledge which you have not. Do not claim to .Icnow . of engineering if you do not . iii. Pay particular attention to that psrf pf your/l story which is linked with the detailh- shewn . in your documents. They may.. be socamined closely. oLi'.-vi' h iv. Your recent history is of most interest to the police. It is also most difficn.lt to invent satisfactorily. Particular -carp .-should be devoted to its preparation p--1 v. Although a cofaplete mastery of details is essential in the preparation of the story vagueness is often desirable when repeating it especially in the case of more distant end less important parts c Documents.  These are supplied by your Section and will be as nearly perfect as-possible. The following points must be remembered  i. You must know how you would have obtained them if they had been issued to you. legally ii. All the documents yoil heed eannot always be produced inythis country e g those which change frequently such as ration cards in some countries. iii. The falsity of forged domment3 is always ultimately detectable if counterfoils exist especially if they are numbered consecutively.  ti'.  It may take a long time to establish this falsity ..  iv. Perfect documents can only be obtained through official sources in the field  Clothes and Effects  i. Do not take anything with you which does not fit your story. ii. Your effects can sometimes furnish valuable corroborative evidence of the truth11 of your background cover e.g. unofficial, T T  A. 4/5. -  3  January 43. papers tickets Pills local products etc. e Change ol Appearance. i. workman ii. people \7ho know you. N.B. Application of disguise is dealt with in a special lecture. f. Final Search. You must search your person and residence for traces which link you with your other self  i. Before your departure. ii. Whenever you change your cover story iii. I iv. I subversive act. FROM BAST TO PRESENT  As soon as you arrive you must adopt a cover life to  account for your presence. Your cover story for your  past must merge naturally into this.  a. From the beginning start completing the details of the cover story of your past. Really do the things you say you have done. Really go to the places you say you have been to. This will serve a double purpose i. You will obtain the information which you would have had had your story been true e.g. see the towns learn their recent history etc. With this knowledge you can support and if necessary modify your back ground cover ii. You can manufacture'evidence confirming 3rour background cover e.g. make acquaintance in the places you go to possess things coming from these places etc b Build up also your present cover background bjr innocent and inconspicuous actions to which reference can be made later. It may be useful to make innocent acquaintances etc  YO'tJR PRESF1I.  This is the life which you lead and the story which you will tell about that life to account for your presence. It may be planned with the help of your Section Officers before your departure. Or you may have to work it out for the first time after your arrival. In any case your ostensible present must be consistent with your alleged past.  a Maintenance of Cover  Kame° Always sign correctly and respond to, Ac 4 5.  January 43. it immediately.  ii. Consistency in Creneral. Your personality and general' conduct 'mus't 'fit your cover background e.g. Expenditure must accord with ostensible income.  olume and nature of correspondence must fit your social circumstances. Character of friends and acquaintances must accord v/ith your cover personality. Documents clothing possessions etc. must be suitable.  Manners tastes bearing accent education and knowledge must accord with your ostensible personality.  iii. Concealment of Absence from your Country. Avoid foreign words tunes manners etc. Avoid slang which has developed among your countrymen in Britain. Avoid shewing knowledge or expressing views acquired in Britain. Conform with all new conditions which have arisen observe new customs and acquire the language which has developed in your country.  a. Cover Occupation. It is advisable for you to have or pretend to have a cover ocetipation. A real one is best but sometimes their subversive activity does not permit agents to do other work. An occupation is necessary  i. To account for presence ii. To explain the source iii. To avoid if possible in Germany or elsewhere. In selecting a cover occupation bear in mind the possibilities of having  An unregistered job such as student stamp dealer or  An imaginary job In this case it is an advantage if you have a real employer to vouch for you.  Your range of choice of occupation is restricted by certain factors. Some of these factors apply also to an imaginary job. Consider tho following   s  Some jobs involve special investigation of credentials and/or restriction of liberty.  The job which you select should afford you cover and facilities for your activity. Con sider hours pay movement technical facilities  e.g. transport storage access etc. You must have adequate technical qualifications  c. Conslusion. Good background cover is hard to build up and easily, A. 4/5.  O  w  January 44  destroyed. It is essential to your relations with the general publid. Never sacrifice such cover once aoiuired if you can possibly avoid it.  Remember howevet that a serious investigation is likely to break down your background cover by exposing the falseness of your documents or state ments about your past life. Always therefore avoid trouble with the authorities. Have a ready story to account for everything.  In some cases an ostensible lawful existence is impossible. Then you must live tinderground. Be inconspicuous. Avoid officials. Vary your appearance habits haunts routes etc. Produce one story or another as the occasion demands   ALIBI .  a Nature of Alibi  In addition to your cover background you must have an explanation ready for every subversive act however small etg conversation journey. Such alibis are more important than your background cover. If they are good no further enquiries will be made.  You may be questioned about your activity in many different'circumstances and have to conceal its true nature e.g. when obtaining permits telephoning by regular or snap controls through infringing regulations or being called as a witness throughsuspicious activity when under surveillance  b. Construction of an Alibi . Remember the following points  i. Plausibility. If you give a plausible expl anatioh of your conduct no further in vestigation is likely. An u .'.plausible one will investigated and must therefore be watertight. A plausible story justifies a friendly policeman in letting you go. If your story is not plausible he may not dare to do so in case you are an agent provocateur ii. Detail. Decide on.the facts which must be prepared in detail and those which can be left vague e.g. people remember times of rendezvous trains etc. but not Then they have finished meals. If you can remember s& time exactly there is usually a reason for-it e.g because you checked your watch with the town hall clock or you - Turned on the wireless for a particular programme and it is occasionally a good thing to mention this casually.  iii. Self-Conaistcnc.y. Your alibi must be conslatent' wPcTT ywur circumstances especially those immediately L. oert.--Vr.'-le e.g. clothes ' general appearance special knowledge activityf  iv. Cover Background. 3 or choice your alibi slTouTd he consistent with your main.c ver background but you may have to manufacture special background for the occasion., 6 January 44  v. Truth. The alihi should he as near the truth as possTble provided that it is not suspicious. Time can he expanded. Dates of events can be transposed. If you do this malce sure you allow'fox different circumstances on different days e g do not say you had been to the market if there is no market on the day fair which you give your alibi although there was one on the day the events of which you have transposed. Furthermore have a story ready in case you are asked about your movements for the day the events of which you have moved. Y/here the story is quite-untrue the false parts can often be rehearsed. Of. Build up of cover above . It is dangerous to tell a story entirely untrue  vi Dead End. In so far as is possible the story should be closed. It should leave few openings for further investigation. Links with outside persons events or places are dangerous.  vii. Consistency with Others. If you are going to mention people who' will corroborate your story you must arrange this very carefully. Attention should be paid to the following pointsV1. Your stories should support each other without being exactly alike. In particular you should not all be vague on the same points and precise on the same points. 2. Consider the possibility of arranging answers to unforseen questions in a partic-ular way e g who took the initiative in a particular action. But if the period is fairly long divide it up so that A took the initiative during the first hour L . during the second etc. unless there is a par ticular reason for one person taring the lead e.g because he was host or because he knows the town better than the others. viii. Discreditable Story. Consider the possibility of using as an™nalTbi7f a discreditable story. Some times this can be used as an alternative'upon which to fall back should the first story break down N.B. Provided that you have not been questioned about your alibi you can change it freely e.g one to explain .hat you are going to-do a second to explain what you are doing and a third to account for what you have done . False Confession.  i   Have ready in case.you are caught red-handed a story that you are engaged in subversive activity but which protects your organisation minimises your role and conceals the fact that you are a parachutist. If possible quote the names of friends who are dead or in safety to support your r ory.   Cf. Y'J's case., A 6. August 44  IIITERROG-AT10KS  1. GEI'lERAL. Interrogations can tie divided into three classes  a Carried out hy Local Police. Generally on account'of infringement of minor regulations. Usually confined to four simple questions  i Who ii Where iii What iv What  If able to satisfy the police on these points suspect is generally released. In the event of any dis crepancies he will he subjected to further interrogation.  Immediately after arrival or after any parachute operation in the neighbourhood you should be prepared to answer plausibly these questions  i Where ii Where iii How iv Where v Who to who knows you personally vi Give  b Carried out by Specialist Police. Indicate type of police. To find out whether a person is definitely suspect e.g. through having failed to satisfy the local police in the preliminary interrogation. Suspect will have to satisfy the police that his story and papers are genuine. His replies will probably be checked. Attempts may be made to catch him out by producing facts which he thinks the Police do not know  c Carried out by Gestapo or equivalent authority after arrest. For a person seriously suspected e.g. because he has failed to satisfy local police and Gestapo in previous interrogations or because ho has been caught red-handed. This interrogation may last from 24 hours to many months. Methods are manifold but aim is single to extract a confession. Ho rules nothing barred  all-in  2. IETERROGATIOH METHODS. a Before Interrogation.  i Sudden but polite arrest on pretext of un important enquiry followed by indefinite detention to prevent warning of associates.  ii Sudden arrest in the middle of the night when vitality is at its lowest  iii Complete house and body search. Exhaustive enquiries about suspect's life and a.ctivities in order to collect as much evidence as possible before interrogation., A. 6. 2 August M iv Treatment in prison all part of interrogation plan e.g bad food alternatively good food comfort and discomfort comparative liberty and solitary confinement promising visits from friends etc. Object is to break down moral strenth before actual Questioning.  13 During Interrogation.  Every effort will be made to make the prisoner feel ill at ease both physically and mentally. Some of the following methods may be tried  i Prisoner facing strong examiner properly  ii Prisoner may be made cr humiliating postures  iii prisoner seated on uncomfortable allowed to eat drink or smoke while examiners Indulge in all three.  iv Prisoner may be wholly sometimes in the presence of members of the opposite sex.  v Prisoner may bo at one end of a long bare room and this isolation may be emphasized by the interrogatorsr pretending to ignore the prisoner.  vi Single interrogation so that prisoner becomes exhausted  vii Prisoner may be threatened squad in the hope he will defy his executioners and admit his guilt  viii Prisoner's family may  ix Prisoner will be insulted Interrogators may try to discover prisoner's susceptibilities so as to direct their insults with telling effect..  x Unsatisfactory pi isoners  . TYPES OP INTERROGATORS. Examination may be carried out by two or more persons acting  simultaneously or more usually in sequence e-g -   First Interrogator often the bully type who tries to make prisoner either angry or frightened impresses on him the terrible power of the Gestapo wir wissen alios threatens throws things about.  Second Interrogator puts clear concise sharp questions if  results are unsatisfactory prisoner may be beaten up .  Third Interrogator friendly offering food drink cigarettes and apologiaing for rough treatment will try to lull prisoner into indiscretion. He may attempt to find out prisoner's hobbies and interests and either discuss them with him or send for another interrogator who knows a good deal about them. Probably most dangerous type., A. 6. -3-August 44. M.B. There may also be present a compatriot c the prisoner. He may act as interpreter or may say nothing. His presence may alter the prisoners attitude e.g. by reason of local knowledge. TECHNIQUE OF QHESTIOKII'TCt.  i Continually with a different method of approach.  ii Suggestion his friends or is shielding some one else.  iii Another with the prisoner.  iv Showing collaborator.  v Reconstruction share in it.  vi Misquotation accepts it directly or by implication he will be accused of lying and bullied until he is   completely confused. vii production have taken place or relation of incidents with slight errors. Then later prisoner is obliged to reproduce plan or relate story in the hope he will unconsciously correct errors or fill in details not mentioned  viii Giving prisoner day of examination.  ix Use of ether.  COUHTER-MEASURBS.  a During the detention.  i If in same organisation beware of microphone. Do not discuss your work unless you can do so by signs or under cover of some other noise.  ii If allowed say nothing danger of stool-pigeons . A favourite trick of stool-pigeons is to appear very miserable you feel so sorry for them that in trying to cheer them up you say too much.  iii Beware of unless you have proof they are working for your organisation.  iv If you are your organisation directly release may be only temporary to watch your movements.  v Always try well dressed Do a little P T. regularly  b During Questioning.  i Speak slowly clearly and firmly. Do not answer, A. 6 4 August 44 simple questions immediately and hesitate with the more difficult ones. Similarly keep an even level of preciseness i.e. do not overdo the detail in replies to easy questions and then forget everything with difficult ones.  ii Remember that shouting joking sentimentality etc. is all an act to make you afraid angry hilarious or senti mental and thereby lesson your vigilance  iii Do not be clever of being an averagely stupid honest citizen trying his best to answer questions intelligently. Interrogators are not impressed by tears or heroics. In occasional .coses a bold attitude sometimes impresses interrogators you must judge them as you see them. Bat always be civil.  iv Avoid replies that All your answers should end in a cul-de-sac. Do not help the interrogators by adding unsolicited information.  v Deny everything you attempt to get round difficulties by altering or embellishing your stories.  vi llever confess because of a colleague. It is useful to arrange for a code sign or signature normal on any statement extracted by force. Even if a comrade recog nises you deny that you know him or if you are supposed to know him deny all knowledge of his subversive work. Even if he has talked under pressure the Germans know that such confessions arc often false.  vii Do not express personal in anybody.  viii Pretend to be worn they are likely either to leave you alone for a bit or to ask the really important questions in which case they are inclined to believe your answers.  ix If you speak German agrees with your cover it is probably best to admit you understand a little or say you learnt it at school but have forgotten most of it. Otherwise they may catch you out with traps. But say you do not know enough to understand or answer questions because then  either the Germans will have to inter rogate in your language which puts them at a disadvantage or else they will have to use an interpreter which is less effective and gives you more time to think as the questions are put twice  they may talk to each-other about you and you may get useful information cf. E s story, A 6. -5 Auf ast 44  if you contradict yourself you can blame the interpreter.  If you speak German really well and this accords with your cover in some cases it may pay to admit if. It tends to dispose them slightly in your favour.  x Demand is your accuser  xi Organisers prisoners should try to hold out in order to allow that part of the organisation with which the prisoner was in contact to put emergency plans into operation  xii If you comrades  xiii Do not did not think they knew --names addresses or even details of training in Great Britain. It is usually bluff.  xiv If you minimising your role which you can support by mentioning the names of colleagues who are dead er in safety or addresses which have been abandoned.  xv Beware whom you may think you have got the better. This may be a trap to tempt you to boast of your clever ness in cireumst rices where your boastings will be reported.  CONCLTJSION.  Have a simple straightforward story and stick to it. And above all go on denying at any price.  --0O0-, A. 7. January 44. V OPERATIONAL ORDERS. ORDERS. Yital to issue orders accurately and securely therefore draw up .your plans. and .orders'under definite headings thus -   Information . Intention. Method.  ' Administration. Inter-communication  Memorise this framev/orlc adherence to this simple foim .nvill prevent omissions in passing on orders to sub ordinates. ' Necessary to consider these headings in detail. a Information. i Relative to target. All available information obtainedeach operator receives that which directly concerns his .share in .the operation. Sketch plan if necessary but destroyimmediately. . ii R esseirffial' Yor 'each' man to carry out his share in the operation. As an encouragement possible bo indicate that substantial forces . being used Gfglf'ii/ co-operation being received from outside operators should know.  Jr- -V.M'Y b Intention. ' . ip./ a Each operator receives' concise statement of intention of operation In so far as it concerns him. For security reasons do not give more than minimum inajo rmation about object of whole operation -may bo necessary however to indicate this in general terms so that the operator appreciates importance of operation e.g. total effect of passive resistance when carried out byall employees in a department '%  -M c Metlea. . Here detailed ins true tioisnmst be given to each operator J ov party separately of what he is to do and how he will do it for the period of the operation. Th following points 'should be considered  i -Sabotage weapons -fire water draught sand passive resistuaoe hammers mis handling instruments or explosives. Explosives only as last resort ii .Sabotage to appear an accident iii C iv A, A. 7 2- January 44  v Retreat from target.  vi Arms type method to be used  d Administrative Arrangements. Here deal with general organisation pay particular attention to periods before and after operation -'the following will have to be included i Cover story for each operator -either open or clandestine not a mixture ii Identity of leaders or contacts if necessary . iii Supplies of arms explosives money food and clothes how and where to be obtained. iv Treatment of casualties. v 'Transport if any. vi Passes. vii Clothes search before operation. viii Synchronisation of watches ix Dispersal arrangements after operation complete 6 Inter-communioat Before during and after an operation inter communication between operators or parties talcing part most importanti Consider therefore the   -if T v fitW KJ V J.AJ following i Password s or recognition signal ii Action sig. iii Cancellation signal iv General warning v Individual danger...signal vi Other means of. communication. vii location of leader s during operation  2. GENERAL SECURITY. byv wp Necessary to preserve utmost security throughout there fore organiser and leaders must observe following and pass on when necessaryi i Issue orders as late as possible. ii Avoid writing downaorders etc. ' iii Give orders to each operator or party separately as far as1possible., A. 7. 3 iv . Do not tell anyone more than he needs to know for the operation.  v Zero hour to  vi Warn operators cancelled at last minute without assigning reason.  vii Ask for questions and have verbal orders repeated back.  viii Warning not operation and avoid shewing satisfaction at success.  -0O0, Ai 0 .9&IQ. ] bruarv. 1944.  Hit  KNOW YOUR ENEMY.  1. ..INTRODUCTION. In order to live in your country you must know the  forces and methods by which the enemy makes resistance  difficult viz.   a .O.E. personnel used spies etc.  b Regulations imp 3ed on the gc isral public which restrict the agent s activities or may cause him to become consj'.cuous.  c Detective measures devised to enforce these regulation md to trap agents of resistance.  d Threats promises reprisals and bribes designed to persuade or frighten the population into preventing or d. nouncing svbversive acts or refraining from them. 2. C.E. PERSONNEL USED. to be mentioned briefly with reference to G. Lectures . German Poll. German Troop National Police National Sabotage -guards etc. Fascist bodies specially formed Individual Nazis. Criminals released for uhe purpose.. Blackmailed persons. Agents arrested and released.  P.O.W. or workers returned from Germany. Persons tempted by rewards. 3. REGULATIONS.  a .Directed against  b .Imposed for ecc black market against girls going out alono .  c .Previous laws and Infringame ' of v iy of those may make the agent conspicuous or suspe-b.   Here briefly mention routine controls -snap and permanent and spies to be dealt with more fully later.   Under each of the following headings quote the regulations of the student's country with advice for that country .  A. Identity. Identity hard co.upu scry in most occupied countries. Entered in archives particulars on it kept up to date. How obtained Officially. Occasions on which it must be produced travel telegraphing etc. Special cards for prohibited Areas., A. 6.9 and IQ 2 Additional documontr confirming identity often carried and sometimes obligatory birth re tificate marriage certificate military jmrine an i demobilisation n-pors etc.  How to got false papers through organisation from patriotic official by pretence of loss of identity ard how to do with unsatisfactory papers or none approach police with question scratched mica cover photo of naked lady'.  Husidonee.  Generally speaking r-sidonee is registered ..in change of residence must be notifijd. bo the authority.   a . Possibilities.  i. Hotels. Regulations. Freedom of movement and inconspicuousness but watching by spies -md difficulty of spotting these. International iu tels probably patronised by Germans. ii. Pensions. Regulations. Less watched by police mid spis easier to spot but gossiping boarders. Satisfactory if owners are rclia1 iii. Lodgings. Regulations. Solitude and unlikelihood of surveillance bu'-you may bo conspicuous and the landlady curious. Hold tc find but satisfactory if the landlady is sympathetic.  iv. Staying with friends. Quite satisfactory. You may' have to take the family into your confidence. They must not be suspect. v. House or flat. Regulations. Flat better'than house- where a newcomer living alone axr os curiosity. Dev .cos for taking it in friend s name. vi. Charitable Institutions. On no account to be  usod strictly supervised and liable-a to mss arrest  vii. Brothel possible for one night in an emergency but.strict supervision and possible informers viii Prostitute with flat P.m ible in an emergency. Prostitutes ...re supervised as a class and may bo used as informers. y  Do not stay in any or lace long. Owner of safe house his not neces arily know that you are . subversive agent., -3    f Prohibited Ayoos and ovqrcf'owded towns. Rcsidonco forbiddon of subjVoV t cT spociol rogulations. Evacuation  c Prohibited porsons. Special regulations for Jews  -r foreigners Poles in certain parts of Poland.  c. '-iirr.  a . Pure locomotion. Regulations for'and controls on  i.  Nuetral zone ii. Prohibited Areas iii. Protected places and places put out of bounds for various reasons iv. Certain classes -foreigners Jew's.  Advice for student's country. Also general advice ... .  i. h ve by day and stick to roads unless circumstances require you to move by stealth  o.g. in prohibited zone . ii. Do not mo in a group of more than two. iii. At night if you m -et a motor car or a bicycle hide. iv. Beware of curlew see later and dusk hour. liOjre at rush hours. v. Be careful on market-days or if there has been trouble vi. Crossing of frontiers and demarcation lines and landing from sea. Controls not always exactly on frontier. Danger of crossing frontier twice. Caution about guides. ..-ie1. By-pass tow if destination and enter it from inland   b  b . Trains. Regulations for security and to prevent over crowding. Where controlled. Advice for student s country. Also general  i. Break up journey ii. In largo station routine controls and secret surveillance are likely in small station you mr be noticed ard remembered.  X'-CO'-IKi o .  iii. Book to tho nearest large station. Do not necessarily get out there. iv. In case tr on is controlled it is useful to go in cent .1 compartment on side furthest from corridor. Vh IP a WB'il Public Transport. Buses trains metro.  d . H cknoy carriages. Taxis cabs velo-taxis .tandems   o Motor cars and cycles. Regulations. Difficulty of obtaining. Petrol .rd tyros.   f  Cycles. Regulations. Convenient but suspected. Special curfew for cyclists.  g .Shipping incl-'d ng inland sea-fishin, -4-   D. CURFEW. Tarics fTCin p1 o to place and month to month. Imposed  as penalty. Special curfews for traffic cyclists young  persons.  Exemptions' .'-   S. TRANSPORT OF GOODS. In trains in vehicles on foot.  Regulations controls and adviceas to transport crr'4 c 4jainal ng matorial.. Camcfuflago. Possibility of disownin& Use of  E. RATIONS. Regulations and controls   a . Ration-cards.   h . Regulations in restaurants etc.   c .Control of harvesting fishing fruit-picking and black market  d 0 LABOUR.  a  b H C01MJMICATI0NS. I. CURRENCY. .How to get food and  .Cons ription. .Control of employment.  Will be dealt with later.  Regulations regarding foreign currency and payments in or possession of national currency.  J. ARMS. Death penalty. K. WIRELESS. Regulations on listening. L. PUBLICATIONS. Censorship including advertisoments M. ALLIED LEAFLETS. To bo handed to police at once. N. AIR RAIDS. O. BLACK-OUT including t chos. p CAMERAS FIET.D-GLASSES MAPS SKETCHING -forbidden in certain areas. Q . TYPEWRITERS. Registered in some countries or leave this to .1 17 . SALVAGE. Paper must not be destroyed in France  S. ASSEMBLIES.. Groups in public clubs dancing. T. PATRIOTIC SYMBOLSf SONGS ate. U. JEWS. Sum up their disabilities. V. POSSIBLE D-DAY REST. 3TI0NS hero or in A. 15 . DETECTIVE MEASURES. A General Controls per lanont or smap and raids.,  a . Object 1. Chock of identityc ii. enforcement of regulations e.g.-black-market travel curfow 1abaif arms. iii. .Search iv. Allied airiaeh. v. . escaped P.O.W. vi. w German deserters-. . ' vii. Jews. Will choqIjl .papers question search persons belongings and promises. N.B. Plaincl othes men who ccimpol wouldbo dodgf re to go through controls. 1 ' b Dangoreus places.  i. Frontiors and demarcation-lines. ii. Trains iii. Large railway stations. iv. Paris metro v. Cinemas. vi. Cafes hotels' restaurants. vii. -Public gatherings. --viii . Bridges and other y.Ps.  c Dangerous TC' s. i. Market days. ii. Week-ends. iii. ust before and after curfew. ' iv. ifto.r disturbances or when wanted men or R.A.F. crews are at large. v. At times of visits of distinguished persons. vi. When tin s of workerd leave for-Germany. vii. When troop trains leave for Eastern front. viii. National feast days. --A ix. i/ftion irrrasion is expected. Therefore keep alert have good informant servico conceal incriminating articles h&vo plausible cover-story prepared in advance approach policeman with a question. Be Informers. Largely looking out for minor offencos black market illegal listening etc. Also v-conscious informers therefore regard everybody as a p -ential. informer. r C Agonts Provoca tours . SoMotimes after small fry black marketers etc. More dangerous one provoke subversive talk by violent Nazism as well as by protended patriotism offer services po.sa as members of subversive organisation ask for help as R.A.F. pilots escapers etc trap friendly police who lot them pass control with arms bogus clandestine newspapers. Notes-Agei. is who have been released after arrest. A special form of provocation is to spread a rumour of an Allied landing which-causps patriots to come into the open. D. Penotration. Double pants. Discretion needed in recruiting men and in contacting other organisations. Double agent may work well for an organisation for a long time before any arrests aro mado., A. 8 9&10. -6-   E. Suryoillojico. Spies'watch'whole coraraunity on chance of picking up something or shadow particular suspect person or place. Certain times and places are especially dangerous -of. A b and c above. F. Direction finding. Will be discussed later. G Censorship open random and secret.  Will bo discussed later and hoar E Do t  Interrogation. Al 'o dy Aincussod.  J Black Lists.   a  of certain classes certain political pant-ins and groups likely to bo anti-Genann. Dram up with help of local-Ha-xts and others  b of particular suspects Based on all the above sources of information Widely circulated and card-indexed. There is however some delay in circulating and. CUE. services do not always pass nomas an to each-other .  J. Mass Arrests -of non likely to be troublesome. Useful for supplying host .gos and also made in the hope of catching some big fish in the net. Largely based on black lists. In some cases men of certain groups are not .arrested but  compelled to report regularly.  \ . 5. REPRISALS AND BRIBEHY.  a Reprisals.  i .Shooting hostages Throat to go on shooting till wanted man is surrendered.  ii .Arbitrary arrests in general.  ill Punishment of whole community -curfev burning and bombing of towns fines requisitions   iv . Punishment of individuals c.g. fan ly of escaper..   bKPopulation as a screen   i .Loc 1 citizens responsible for sabotage.  ii .Local citizens will endanger them -e g on troop trains. ' c .Rewards. Given t ..hole communities for good behaviour e. g extra rations lifting of curfew release of local P.O.W after Dieppe raid.  Reprisals vary greatly in intensity according to place and tine. Often Germans do not wish by reprisals to advertise successful subversive activity.  oOo-, A.11. Januer y 1'944. SURVEILIu IIGE . '  II RQDUGTIOR.  Surveillance is'the Ireepln. of someone under observation without his knowledge /  You are most 'interested in this question from the Defensive   point of view i.o. knowing what to clo about being vfatcKo'd' yourself hut1 a study of the-Active aspect i.o. hov to carrj out surveillance ' is also useful because  i. You may want to observe someone secretly yourself. ii. You V'Jill understand better what you are up against B. HOW TO CARRY OUT ILLA1TC3 . 'The following methods arc used by police 'watchers. If you  have to do any surveillance make use of those methods as  far as practicable  1 Organisati on0  a .Best  i. Below avorage height no striking peculiarities ii. Possessing detailed knowledge of district. b .Use  i. Police usually employ more than one watcher simultaneous' s' Including women.  ii. A relay system Is often organised whereby any watciior who is detected by the quarry is replaced by another  c .-Uso are so mctamos used.  2. Preparations by watcher. a .Ins what ho has to do what activities of the quarry arc of particular interest and whether ho is to continue watching if detected.  b .Infwrmution. Information about the quarry descripcion addresses usual movements habits interests so as to anticipate the quarry s actions 'or pick him up again  if lost .  c EqujLjxaont.  i. Clothes Those should either fit the locality V o.g. socman s jersey near docks or bo inconspfouous by thoir noutrality. In any case they should bo. dark' rather than light in colour it is advisable to anticipate any change In the woather. It is aomotinjbs vory usefu1 to chango all or some clothes on route.  ii . jkiot shoos., A 1i . Junuary 1944.  iii. It is unwise to carry any conspicuous article  0 5 stick large parcel iv. Honey It is necessary to take sufficient money particularly small change. v Reading matter often comes in useful during a long period of waiting.  vi. Pood and tobacco. It may bo impossible to obtain these while carrying out surveillance vii. Watch pencil and paper. d . Cover. The watcher must consider what is to bo his cover background and alibi while carrying out surveillance It is advisable to prepare this beforehand though he must also be ready to adapt it to any special circum stances that may arise.  ' TT.L -Usefulness of women to provide cover.  0 . Plan. If the watcher is one of a team a plan must be prepared. In particular visual signals should be arranged e g. signal indicating ''I have lost quarry'1 .  f . Lavatory. Box'oro' 'starting surveillance the watcher should relieve himself cf. Duke of Wellington .  Technique .  Ulustrato with diagrams .  a .Position of watchers. The distance v atc hef s and TiTio quarry should vary according to the circumstances. It is often' bettor to use the opposite side of the road. With a team of watchers it is useful to change positions occasionally e g. when turning corner . Watchers should try to approach the quarry from different angles -not always from behind. With a team it may be useful for one watcher occasionally to be in front of the quarry. There is no reason why a watcher should not make up distance rapidly by hurrying provided that he is out of eight of the quarry and shows some pretext e.g. looking at his watch .  b .Concealment and camouflage on the move. sKouTd alw fys' tr y tfd kGop' something between him and the quarry c g. lamp-post pedestrian . Ho should mix with other people walk alongside them cross the road in company. If the quarry stops or turns back the watcher should not hesitate but should do something definite e.g go into shop speak to. passer-by go straight on .  c . Concealment and camouflage when stationary The waTcE'e'rshouldchoose 19good'ploclf forV Ei station -  o.g. physically concealed or as one of a crowd or in a normal waiting place o g. bus stop . d .Looking at quarry. As soon as the up hri s 'quaVr'y/ lib should note the features by which ho intends to recognise him in future. These may well bo different from the features given in a description . As far as possible he should look at the quarry-in directly making use of shop window reflections etc Above all he must avoid catching the eye of the quarry., A 11 January 1944.  3  q . Anticipating his movomon-ts. The watcher should alwaysTry ro o 'oKo ' juhip'c'hoad. of the quarry. In this ho will ho helped by his knowledge of tho district and of tho quarry's habits.  f In a big 'building with iaorq than one exit it .is usually necessary for ono t/atchor to follow hira in unless it is possible for all the exits to be kept under observation.  g In public vehicle the'watcher should try to put himself in such a position that he will bo .able to hear the quarry's destination before ho .gets his own ticket. Sometimes it is possible to got on the same vehicle at a later  stop vv jv-tv .  h . Inside o. bar etc. Tho watcher should choose his position very carefully so that ho can keep the -quarry' under observation without being watched himself. If he wishes to look directly at the quarry ho should choose a moment when he can look at him naturally   e.g. when drinking . It is a /ays advisable to pa tho bill early and it is usually bettor to leave the place before tho quarry. HOY TO DEPEID YOURSELF AGAIITST SURVBILIAHCE .  1. Routino Procautions. Whenever you are going caywhoro on secret work you must automatically take routine precautions which will make it difficult for you to bo secretly watch .d a .You should hanging about especially v/hon you aro leaving any house.  b .Donotgo  c .Make use If you use the former board it on tho run. If you use the latter do not take one which offers to pick you up and start by tolling tho driver the wrong destination. You should novor take a vehicle right up to your destination but complete the journey on  foot.  d Make some  c . Visit at least one crowded place f . Do not walk or hang about in places-whore you could easily be watched without detecting it.   2 If you suspect' that you are bq-ing watched a Show no signs pace and do not look round unnecessarily.  b .Postpone with other agents use of danger signal  c Chock up watched and to got tho description of the watcher or watchers It is essential to do this.bocause you may easily imagine that you arc being watched especially If your nerves aro strained. ' Tho, A. 11 January follov.'infj mothods mdy bo usod  i. Find soma road do up shoo li ht plpo watch -protty girl . ii. Isolate -. into an empty street or shop. iii. Surprise surprise by some quick movement -o.g. jumping on bus changing direction stopping round ' a corner all with a good pretext .  N.B -Remember that there may bo more than ono watcher do not be satisfied with detecting only ono  5. After making sure that you arc being watched. If you Eavo''cEoclcbd''up'aheT oWaThed ' sodkTForT 'of a. description of your watchers you have two alternatives open to ypuja .If It is . essential for you of innocence and. If you can postpone your immediate job it is wisest to do so and to behave perfectly Innocently. If at tho same time you.make contact with a number of -peoplo visit shops etc you will  .give tho police some ' clues to follow up which when proved false may convince thorn of .your innocence  b .If on tho other hand you work you must first shake off tho watchers. If there is more than one you may have to do this piece meal you can nearly always drop all but ono by taking a vehicle unexpectedly.  The best method for shaking off one watcher in a natural manner is to lead him through a long dosorted street or space whore he must remain at a distance and then to plunge into a crowd or take other suddon action before he has'time to catch you' up .  In any town where you are going to work you should plan a number of alternative methods for shakingwatcher off so that if you find yoursoIf under surveillance you will be able to act without hesitation.  4. Subsequent action. If you are under surveillance you must Ft oneo warn all your contacts It may be necessary for you to make a get-away at once. If however you are not convinced of the danger it may bo advisable to have yourself watched by a colleague who will-easily identify anyone ols-o who -is watching yon-.- D COHCUJSIOh.  If you are .being watched It is essential for you to bo aware ofit o  1. This will enable you to retain the initiative yourself and determine your own course of action. 2 . It will also give you early warning that you arc suspected  presumably by the police and enable you to make a got-awny before they are ready to arrest you.  -oOo-,  A REVISION PROBLEMS. Lectures 1-11.  Whv is information indispensable to an agent Give soine examples. Where and how does he get this infarmatron  How should an agent constantly act to avoid 'betraying his cover  Instruct a new recruit on the importance and the creation of alibis.  Give advice to a recruit on how to behave if he is interrogated a during a control To at Police H.Q .  What sort of controls might an agent find in an occupied country Where and when What is the protection against them Explain to a new recruit the dangers of being followed and the counter-measures to take.  How do the Police set about organising the surveillance of a suspect, An 12 15 14 June 44.  HCTEMAL OCMMDgIGATIONS.  PART I  A. GENERAL. Oorimunieations are essential -but always liable to bo dangerous. There is a tfisk to th.e recipient es well as to the sender because  a if one correspondent is suspect the other may be involved  b the correspondence itself may be suspicious  c the enemy may be able to find out where you are or to identify you under two different covers even if the communications are really innocent.  B. CHOICE OF MEANS. As always the maximum security should always be aimed at and this can be relaxed only when other vital considerations demand it. The choice of the method therefore depends on  a Length of Message  Maximum security is achieved by an encoded message in an innocent letter which in no way indicates tho subversive nature of the message. But a long message such as a report oould not be sent this way. thus eliminating the post.  Nature of the Message  Certain information G.gc maps drawings microphotos can only be sent in its original form Likewise other openly sub versive matter e0g propaganda0  0 Necessity for speedc  for urgent messages the post or advertisements would be too slow  However remember that one must always try to prevent indicating a direct or permanent connection between two agents. Therefore the liberal use of Cut-Outs is essential.  n CUT-OUTS.  Should be used as much as possible.  a Definition.  A Cut-out or intermediary. 1cm the-link between two agents or between an age i and his chief Ho may know very little about the organisation end just carry messages he may be a liaison officer who is'able to answer questions and take decisions or he may be a figure-head a man trusted and respected by the men whom you wish to work for you  h Reasons for jtenloyment  1. It is dangerous for two important agents particularly from different sections of the organisation to be noticed together. ii. One agent may net want another with whom he communicates to know himo iii. An agont wants a barrier between himself and any authorities e. g. when Bonding a telegram making an official enquiry hiring a flat., , 13y X4  3 - June 44. IvlEBTINGS BETji/EEM AGENTS /H0 KNOW EACH OTHER a Gojer. TMro are three possibilities open  i As persons previously especially if the two agents are meeting frequently but useful if two chiefs have to meet to discuss plans. It should then be in a place where neither are known. ii As acquaintances ' coincidence'1 it must not bo repeated too frequently but it is probably the best if done carefully. Both the above roethods have the advantage that they do not indicate a close connexion between the two agents. In either case it is important that the first agent to arrive at the meeting placo should not show any sign of impatience. r   ill As acquaintances meeting by appointment. This cover is best if there is a suitable reason for the appointment. It is essential that both agents should clearly understand what is to be the cover for any mooting otherwise there may be confusion. b Meeting Places. In choosing a mooting place you must consider the cover background of both agents and also the possibility of being overheard and perhaps not iced together . i inadvisable. Hallway stations hotels large restaurants cinemas post offices public meetings and in general anywhere where police 1 informants are likely to be found or snap controls take place. N.B. If it is necessary to meet in such a place e.g. because one-agent does not know any other after the two have recognised each other one can lead off the other follow and the actual contact made in a safer place. More Suitable. Streets parks churches museums galleries baths. In general anywhere whore it is the national custom to con gregate and hang about though any of these places may become dangerous as the result of events private houses or offices offer the most privacy and are therefore suitable provided that there is adequate cover. General-preoautjons. Never visit another agont without previously arranging to do so. i ii Take precautions when making the arrangements for a mooting  e.g. arrange the place and time separately use a simple code . Do not fix mootings too far ahead. iii it may bo advisable.visits to the place both before and after using it for your secret meeting e.g. ohurch . iv Change your keep to the same one for long. Do not have a regular meeting placo., -4-A.12 13 14. June 44.  v Be punctual. and hang about and it is always a grave error to be late. You . at therefore. arrange tip synclironiso hour watches a i arrive to the minute.  vi Arrange a time will not wait. This should be short.  vii Arrange an alternative to prevent the first taking.place e.g. transport difficulties air raids etc.  viii Take the usual you have the slightest suspicions chock up. An easy safeguard is to arrange the mooting tg take place after dark.  ix Arrange a safe usually the absence of the safe sign. This may denote HDo not recognise me or T pllow' me to a safer .place . Consider synchronisation of sign with time e.g. opening window at noon.  x Never have more  xi Take precautions hotel restaurant office where they may have been installed. The best method is to talk under cover of some noise e.g. traffic gramophone running tap .  d Conformation.  If the'agents-converse about socret matters certain precautions must bo taken  i Acover conversation or '.questioning by the police.  ii Do not whisper  iii Smile and laugh  iv It may be worth conversation in case it is possible for others to overhear.  v Beware of anyone He will almost certainly overhear your conversation.  e Passing written jnesssgea or other docuiilontn.  i It is best to it can then be passed quite straightforwardly without any fear of mistake.  ii If it is necessary to pass it in front of other people the method should be carefully arranged and if possible practised by both.agents. Perhaps the best method at least T/ith a large document is for agents to carry similar article   c.g. brief cases and to oxchanvo them. iii If it is to bo passed clandestinely arrange a. sign to show that the passing has boon done., A. IK IB 14. 5 -. June 447 MEETINGS BSMEmf AGENTS MQ DO HOT KNOW EACH OTHER. Many of the precautions already mentioned will apply also to this type of meeting. Though prohafely the host precaution Is for the two agents to be either introduced by a third perron or at least pointed out to each other. When this is not possible the following additional precautions must be considered  v a Description.  Each agent should if possible have a description of the other The only substitute is to arrange a combination of signs but this is not so satisfactory as it facilitates a police trap b. Password. Insufficient core is usually taken in arranging pasOTords. Any password must be tested by considering the following two questions about it -  If givon to the wrong person will it arouse any suspicion Gould the wrong person use the password by accident I -The following are the main poinfs to be considered when framing a password  i it must notbe melodramatic. li It must not be a.phrase which may prove incongruous when it is delivered e.g. something abo\it the weather . iii It must not be a phrase which may coramit the speaker to further explanations or actions e.g. rI have a message for Tony . lv It should fit the cover background of the two agents and of the meeting v It is probably best to 'use a thoroughly banal phrase marked in some way e.g. by one special word a pause or a gesture or use of name in sentence. vi It must be very brief no agent should be expected to remember accurately more than say ten words. vli Alternative replies may be arranged one denoting safety thd other danger. The following points should be remembered about the using of the password  It-must be given accurately hence the need to frame a short one . It must be rejected if not aoou.re.te. Unless it is an opening phrase it must be introduced naturally into the conversation without undue hurry. i The reply must bo given as soon as the first agent has delivered his part of the password otherwise the first agent would be justified in thinking that he had made a mist ake. c Special Preoautions. I ' / . . If two important loaders perhaps from two different sections of the organisation have to meet it might be worth while to take, A 12 15 14. June 44.  6 special'precautions e g -i use special cover names fa the meeting. ii Meet on neutral ground' unfamiliar to either. iix Use an internediary to make all the arrangements. iv Talk together without actually seeing one another  o.g hy using adjoining room in the same house . MEETETGS BETWEEN jiN .AGENT iJID M GUI SIDM . If you are instructed to contact someone outside the organisation it is probably best to meet him accidentally rather than to arrange a definite appointment. Tf you are invited by someone outside the organisation to meet him  y5Lr°e pLticulLly e reful -It KM M a trep. The follo.lng points should be considered a It is better for you to fix the time and place of the meeting. b You might send a colleague to' meet him and bring him elsewhere on pretext that you were detained. c You might intercept him yourself on his way to the meeting and take him elsewhere ' d You can send a colleague to recce the place and warn you if there is ny danger. o You can have yourself followed to see whether you ire being watched and the'other men followed to see whetaer he is acting suspiciously .-  PART II. TT. POST. Regulations and methods of control in Student s country. As a means of subversive oauamnicaticn the.post has.certain disadvantages a It is subject to censorship both random and of particular suspect correspondonco. Even random censorship is sometimes done secretly. b Delays and uncertainty. c Fame-of recipient appears on envelope. If the post is used some or all of the following precautions should he taken. Note also that some of tljpse precautions should be taken when pending a letter by clandestine means courier otc., A -a 13 j 13j 1A- -7 -Julie 44. a Post should not ho used by a suspected oerson or.in writing to a suspected person unless essential0 b Check correspondence regularly fon secret' censorship. Hear ifE Departi ent. Do not use hair sand etc. o Both writer and recipient-must have plausible explanation of the letter or correspondence. Often this is most easily arranged by assuming only slight acquaintance. Consider possibilities of having letters.written by soma-one who has suitable cover perhaps at youn C.lctat iotie d If you to avoid as far as possible censorship of letters do not .use airmail registered mail or paicel post. Post cards and business letters are safest. But business letters railst be written on papor with a proper heading of a business.  All post-restante correspondence is censored . regarded as otentially suspicious and often watched. Dover use it.  f vilhere you mast write yourself and must conceal your name and addre from the censor or the recipient. i Sign ii Avoid If necessary use real address of he tel ci.n.b collaborator etc. -A bogus addx-ess may be instantly recognised by censor as such. iii Do not Disguised writing can be ti'aced to writer in any case it looks disguised. iv Typescript the writer through his mannerisms . In some countries . machines are registered. v Be sure Remember danger that follower may post newspaper or other letter immediately after yours. Post at rush-hour. vi Use post a series of letters use different boxes. g Use common stationery. Thini paper is best because it can be  - Ijestroyod easily and thin envelopes are harder to open secretly.  . N h Accommodation address Letters my be posted to a. third party froifi. whom the recipient collects them. The same method may be usbd with telegrams and the telephone. Suitable only for one-way correspondence. Useful for-the. same reason as a Cut-Out -delays transfer of suspicion conceals identity of one correspondent' from the other provides cover for oOxu npondenoe-. i The written to the intermediary himself it may be desirable to put some distinguishing sign on the envelope as a warning to the intermediary. He should be in a position to receive mail without arousing comment and to open xx himself-  H fntc.TTOodiarj. need not know purport of message., A. 12. 13. 14. 8 -Jtine 44. ill Intertaodiary should maintain cover hy sending answers to your letters if necessary. iv Arrange for the intermediary to show a signal that a messago is waiting to be collected this may be the same as the safety signal. Letters should be collected as soon as possible regularly or on signal'being given . y Do not use the same accommodation address for too many agent  and chango such addresses from time to time. LmJ30IlE AmC--LEITRj S.''  This is a person at a fixed place with whop one agent loaves a message to be collected by another like an accommodation address but without use of the post or other official means of communication and serves the same purpose. He may be a member of the organisation or an 'outsider engaged on seme falso pretext. It is safest that a message should remain in the hands of the organisation all the time on the other hand you.must not make your organisation too large. Some organisers consider these boitos-aux-lettros very unsafe. In any case you must give him a reason to deceive the police or to deceive himself for keeping the correspondence secret. a Arrange signals as for accommodation b Clear the box as soon as possible. c The intermediary may keep a decoy letter for production to the police in case of enquiries. d The real message may be written in secret ink or undisguised code Therefore long messages can be sent. e If a message is disguised its innocent'' wording may refer to a fraudulent or scandalous affair. % IV. DEAD BOITE-AUK-LETTRES. A hidingplace without a living intermediary. In the country there are many such places. in a town telephone boxes church furniture etc. Its advantages aro that there is no one to be recruited and liable to talk on the other hand it cannot warn you if it is discovered the police may watch your correspondence without removing it or substitute decoy sicssages. a Choose place where it is easy to plane and collect message unseen. It is harder to collect than to place. b Avoid place where an innocent person might find'message by . . accident e.g r cleaner might throw it away  o Check carefully for surveillance when using the boito. Have tricks for detecting if letter has been seen and replaced  e.g. message. folded five times but left folded only four. 'X . \ i it ./.  4 vW. /  a Have several different boites and use them in an agreed order or indicate the' next boito to be used in the .preceding message 'or by some other moans of comnunication.'  Signal showing that message awaits collection. i, A. 12 15 14. -9 -June 44.  Combination of H.V. and bolto-aux-lettres i.e. letter is collected limaedlately after it has been deposited  Y. COURIER .  \ './ . . . . ' A person who carries a message. 3n some districts it is forbidden to carry letters. His connectionpwith the organisation is governed by the same considerations as that of tne live boito aux d.ettros If you get  som&on to deliver a message without knowing what it is he may be careless  with it not realising its-importance.  a The best type of person to choose is one who already travels the route. Women'make good couriers.  b Give him general instructions tot  i. Get to knoY/ facilities controls ways of dodging these ii. Practise hiding iii. Practise defence Give him specific instructions about  i Exact method of receiving and of delivering message  ii. What to do if he cannot collect or deliver a message iii. Wft at to do in case of danger. d Ror a long journey if you cannot find a courier with good cover such as a railway guard you must arrange a relay system  cf. Dame Blanche .  e Form of messages  i. .1 written message may be in secret ink end therefore long or in code. This has the advantage that the courier need not know the contentsj but it may be found .on him. Use paper or other material which can be hidden or destroyed. ii. Ac oral message cannot be found but 1 it may bo garbled in transmission especially by relays  4 1 '  -if it is in cigar the courier raay be compelled to ' reveal it   1 . -he cannot learn a code-message letter by letter.  A crack signal or short message in simple woi'd-oode could he-conveyed by a courier.  YX. DEAD CQGBXER -   A message may be planted in a vehicle and collected e.g. in a lavatory on a train. It has the some pros and cons as a dead boito-aux-lettres  ''r . -i  7II TELEGRAPH. .  '  Regulations and control in students own country. Much censored copies kept  a Cover for telegraphing urgency importance.  b Recipient must be socially appropriate., A. 12 13 14. -10 -. June 44 -o iise of -intermediary to hand it In. Best for simple message of which recipient knows context indicating your whereaboiits answei'ing questions giving part of a .message in two parts giving agreed signal. VIII. T-ELBFH0N1. .  V- Begulations.' Very dangerous a Censorship recording. h You cannot toll if your conversation is listened to. c If you ring up from a private number i the police can trace' a suspect call to you ii. if you ante suspect they have a rectrd of all calls made from your number and can trace your colleagues. d In certain places e.g. near V.P. and in favourite resorts of informers public call-boxes may be watched. Yifome'n in charge of telephone booths in Ecance work for the Police. o If Police have reason to suspect a call even from a public box  e.g. they are looking out for all calls made to a pertain  number they may cause the operator to delay putting through the. call to give them time to come round for you e.g. they stop your call on the pretext of giving priority to an Army message . In this case do not wait. f If you ring up several colleagues in succession even-from.a public box the police may link them with each other. f g Conversation must seem natural. Codes even simple word codes impossible or may involve you in queer language. Possible devices Numbers disguised by arithmetical calculation or split between two calls all by arrangement . V Mix message with innocent talk or split between two..calls etc. EC. ADVERT ISEMENT IN THE PRESS. Regulations Very strict censorship. Delay in insertion. Newspaper not always obtainable b. Simple word code 'or crack signal. --'V b Cover. You must be prepared to act up to advertisemont. In case of lost article- perhaps lose something in reality and/or enquire at Lost Property Office c Use of Cut-Out for inserting. Good for communicating with many people at once . They cannot be traced. Danger or action signal re-establishment of contact. Advertisement in stop-window or on lamp-post .ceording to custom of country can be used. It must bo where the addressee can safely watch for it., A 15. July 44.  USE OF PREMISES.  1. INTRODUCTION. . . It must be recognised that the use of premises must bring with it special security problems. Normally premises should be  used for subversive activity as little as possible. The organiser should try to keep his plans and records in his  head and meet agents in many different places. As the organisation grows it will become necessary to use premises  for the above purposes.i  2. CHOOSINCt PREMISES. Field of choice v/ill depend much on the particular country or region. In thinly populated country districts there may be opportunities for using isolated buildings -e.g. hiking or. ski-ihg huts. In a densely populated country a private house flat or commercial establishment in a town may have go be used. In selecting the latter the following factors should be considered.   a Location. It is important that strangers may be able to find their  way without arousing suspicion by making onquiries or by their appearance being out of tune with the district  e.g. a poorly dressed person will not necessarily be conspicuous in a wealthy quarter whereas che converse is not true.   b Cover. i. For the establishment. Wherever possible an attempt should be made to  utilise an existing concern any new business is  very likely to be suspect and subject to enquiry   see below . The usual office hours should be kept bills paid normally and genuine business conducted.  It must fit intn the background -o.g. if it is a shop it iTvnet be of the appropriate class for the  Its cover must bo built up. If possible genu business should be carried before .cniVvex-sive activity is started.  ii. For yisitors. It ipust provide cover for agents who come to visit it -suitable cover bo.ih for regular cut-outs and for irregular visitors or complete strangers  e.g. from abroad. Visitors must have genuine reason for coming.  c Control of Access. There are three degrees of access available in a town, A. 15. 2 July 44 each degree giving you'cover in inverse propertion to the degree of security.  Examples.  i. A general shop the entry of police spies. Good cover for establishment and for visitors very little control of access. ii. An establishment clients -e.g. tailor doctor dentist. Good cover for establishment' more difficult for visitors more control of access. iii. Aprivate office i clients. Most difficult for police infiltration  need for an adequate story waiting-rooms etc. Safes and records may also be Icept here. The owner can combine the functions of H.Q. and cut-out acting as a representative of the organiser or as a dummy organiser. Good cover for establish ment cover for some agents may be difficult good control of access.  iv. Private residence. cover this may be good but frequent visits may be dangerous -neighbour '-' may talk concierge may be informer.  Defensive Facilities.  Consider the suitability of the premises from a defensive point of vie -i.e.  i. Facilities for e.g. thickness of walls etc. ii. Facilities for Consider possibility of taking the house or flat next door as a means of escape. iii. Vulnerability 3 SECURITY PRECAUTIOUS.  As many as possible of the following precautions should be taken in connection with any premises including agentT s -own place of residence   a The organiser must not use his place of residence and/or his place of occupation for subversive activity  b It is better to recruit the owner or occupant of an existing establishment than to set up a new establishment and instal new personnel. Give regulations existing in particular country concerning opening of new establishment. If new premises are being sought care should be taken not to betray the use to which they are to be put e.g. indiscreet enquiries about electric current or number of doors., A 15. -o -July 44.   c The principle of dispersal is most important. It is a great mistake to concentrate too many activities in one place -o.g. do not keep your documents at a place where agents meet.  d Ho particular set of premises should be known to more than thenecessary minimum number of agents.  e Agent must always be able to tell whether a room has been entered and searched during his absence. The best precaution is tidiness though traps may be set providing they are not conspicuous e.g. fluff or ash in book zip fastener on case blotting paper on pad.    f As little incriminating material as possible should be kept on the premises. Anything no longer needed should be destroyed -e.g. code workings. Danger of leaving unfinished code work. y.B. Traces on'blotting paper and writing blocks carbons and typewriter ribbons.  g Hiding places should be prepared. It may be necessary to have both permanent and emergency hiding places the latter only to be used if the premises are raided while the incriminating articles are in use. Quantities of arms and explosives should 'be put in special caches. Fireplaces and any other places in current fashion  with the police should be avoided. In this con  nection information about any successful police  searches is most valuable.  Permanent hiding places should be difficult of access rather than subtle -e.g burial.  Documents should not be concealed in places where  bulky material might be found -in case they are  looking for food for example.   h Preparations should be made for destroying incriminating evidence which is too dangerous to conceal. H.B Quantities of paper burn very slowly even when petrol-soaked and ashes may be de ciphered unless bx oken up.   i Provision should bo made for persons to escape in case of sudden danger alternative exit and to clear away all traces. A final check should be made preferably by someone who has not helped to clear up.  j If cover permits someone should always be on guard. It may be very useful particularly in the case of rooms situated in a large block if Someone -e.g. the hall-porter -can be enrolled to act as guard and a warning system of communications arranged though remember danger of informers among concierges.  k All-clear and danger signs should be pre-arranged. These should be if possible visible from outside. If not method of arranging room or opening conversation A 'normal sign should be used to denote danger. Possibility of limiting times for calling and only shew ing sign then., A. 15. 4 July 44.  1 A constant watch should he kept to see whether the promises arc under observation and when any-one enters or leaves a check should he made to see that he is not followed and if he is a warning should he arranged  rn It may he wise for frequent visitors to alter their dress slightly and arrive by different methods in order to avoid attracting attention.    n  Emphasize In case one set of premises comes under suspicion an alternative.set should he ready with the necessary cover story built up.  o  Emphasize If any person who knows of the premises Is arrested they should he evacuated at least temporarily. -oOo, August 44.  PREMISES AND SAC IRIIY FOR W/T OPERATOR  1. IEPRODuCTIOE. The lecture deals with aspects -of security-for w/l Operators  apart from those general principles.laid down in Individual Security and In the cxhoice of transmitting houses.  2. CHOICE OF PREMISES - . Ideal arrangement would he a large number of sets and an equal  number of transmission premises well dispersed. However there  are probably fewer sets available than premises therefore policy  will depend oh which of the following dangers is the greater in the lochlity  a. Enemy w/I interception and D.F.-ing in which case frequent changes of Premises and transportation of set from one to another are essential. b. Snap controls and searches of baggage etc. in which case there Is considerable danger in transporting the set. Therefore in choosing Premises the following considerations are essentialj   Technical'Requirements.  Transmission and reception are prejudiced by the  following  i. Steel framed ii. Trees or iii. Nearby within 30 yards . iv. Electric v. Machines razors dr dry cleaning apparatus. . N.B. Power Stations etc. do make pinpoint D.F.-ing more difficult but seriously interfere with transmission and reception and therefore the operator runs greater risk'by having to repeat messages and being on the air longer  Aerial camouflage.  An outside aerial may be difficult to camouflage and to. instal .clandestinely but would probably be more efficient than an inside aerial.  B. .Security Requirements.. i. Location. It Is Important that the operator should be able  to go to the house without arousing any suspicion  e .g by his appearance being out of tune with the  district a poorly dressed personwill not  necessarily be conspicuous in a wealthy quarter, . A.l'5 W/Xt  -2 -   August 44. whereas the. converse is not true  ii. Cover. a. ffor the esta Wherever possible an attempt should be made to utilise an existing..establishment wi th a perfectly normal cover already built up.  b. For visiting Operator and his guards must have a genuine  reason for visiting premises. It may be difficult  for operator with tour cover to have alibi for  visiting country pre'mises frequently.  iii Control of Ac ce ss .  Operator must limit the number and type'of people with possible access to the premises.  iv.' Defensiye Faci.litles.  Some attention should be paid to the suitability of the premises from a defensive point of view -i.e.  a. Facilities for concealing set documents and spare parts -e.g. thickness of wall etc. b. Facilities for escape alternative exits .. Con sider possibility of taking-house or flat next door as means of escape. c. Facilities for his guards whilst watching for D.F. cars. d. Vulnerability to seirveillance. C. Enemy C.E. Methods in -the liocality. . Particular attention must be paid to enemy C.E. methods for . detecting illegal transmitting when choosing premises.  C.E. METHODS MPhOYED. A. Enemy C.E. Methods for Detecting Illegal Transmitting. let us now consider some of the other difficulties for the operator which are outside his control. The' enemy has an efficient organisation for detecting illegal wireless transmitting stations. It is in fact one of the most important features of his C.E. system. Generally he employs any or all of the following methods  i. Citizens are forbidden sets. ii. Ills usual C.E. informant suspicious events and behaviour. iii. Frequent snap controls are being moved from-place to place. iv. Search of localities where believed to have taken place., A.I5.W/X. Au usT 44.  y. His interception service will record all messages believed to be illicit and every effort will be made to break down the cipher vi. By the use of'D.F equipment. B. Enemy Methods of D.F.-ing  In the case of D.F. it is known that the enemy has a very efficient service for locating illicit transmitting sets and although he will attempt to catch the operator at work these dangers can be reduced to a minimum'if ordinary precautions are taken. She enemy is known to employ the following means  i. numerous fixed D.F area of the transmitter. ii. Many mobile D.F. small delivery vans with non-metal bodies ambulances laundry vans in fact any1 ordinary type of vehicle in general every day use in that particular locality. These vehicles generally work in pairs or threes and are used to localise the whereabouts of the transmitter iii. Hand-carried D.F. cannot be reached by car iv. Slow-flying aircraft believed vicinity of the transmitter and may dive low over the station. It is known that these air craft sometimes drop paper to indicate the exact location of the house v. 'The electric supply the locality where an illegal transmitter is believed to be working. It is easiest to pinpoint an illegal station when it is in the country but on the other hand the enemy has the most numerous D.F apparatus in the large towns and it is therefore generally agreed that a suburb is probably the safest place  SECURITY PRECAUTIONS.  a Against D.F.-ing.  i. If possible Operator sets in different localities andi use them at .different times on different days. The safest is not to use one house more than once every fifteen days  ii. Alternatively move when opportunity arises and as often as possible. The operator must never do this himself. iii. It is essential that for him to warn him of the approach of mobile D.F stations and help him move his set normally he should recru.it and train these himself. iv. From his station it the approach of D.F. carSo stations  v. Transmissions must, A 15.1T/Xo -4  Augu.st 44.  minutes maximum messages Iriei and explicit. Every  additional word increases danger of being D.E.ed.  vi. To counteract the cutting of the electricity he should have a battery available so that he can continue his transmission. b. Eor Premises. As many as possible of the following precautions should be taken in connection with any premises ...including own place  of residences  i. The Operator must not use his his place of occupation for subversive activity ii. It is better to recruit the owner existing establishment than to set up a new establish ment and instal new. personnel. ' Give regulation existing in particular country concerning opening of new establishment. If new premises are being sought care should be taken not to betray 'the use to which they are to be put. e.g. indiscreet enquiries about electric current or number of doors iii. The principle of dispersal is most great mistake to concentrate too many activities in one place -e.g. do not keep your documents at a place where agents meet. iv. .Jo particular set of premises should 'than the necessary minimum of agents. v. Agent must always be able to tell been entered and searched during his absence The best precaution is tidiness though traps may be. set providing they are not conspicuous e g0 fluff or ash'in book zip fastener on case blotting paper on pad. vi. As little incriminating material be kept on the premises. Anything no longer needed should be destroyed -o.jg code workings. Danger of leaving unfinished code work H B. traces on blotting paper and writing blocks' carbons and type writer ribbons vii. Hiding places should be prepared particularly for set and plan with the plan always separate from the set'. It may be necessary to have both permanent and emergency hiding places -the latter only to be used if the premises are raided while the incriminating articles are in use. Fireplaces and any other places in current fashion  with the police should be avoided. In this connection information about any successful police searches is  most valuable.  Permanent hiding places should be difficult of access rather than subtle -e.g. burial.  Documents should not be concealed in places where  bulky material might be found -in case they are  looking for food for example.  viii. Preparations should be made for destroying incriminating, A 15tT7/X. 5  August 44  evidence which is too dangerous to conceal.  II.B. Quantities of'paper burn very slowly even when petrol-soaked and ashes may be deciphered unless broken up. ox. Provision should be made for persons toescape in case of sudden danger alternative exit and to clear away all traces. A final check should be made preferably by someone who has not helped to clear up. Operator should not leave with his guards and all should leave separately at intervals.  x. If possible choose a room with mitting and be near the light switch. xi. As already stated when transmitting always be on guard. One man should be in the room with the operator and in a position to see signals from outside guards. It may be very useful particularly in the case of rooms situated in a large block if someone -e g. the hall-porter -can be enrolled to act as guard and a warning system of communications arranged though remember danger o.f informers among such people. xii. All-clear and danger signs should when the operator arrives at his transmitting house. These should be if possible visible from outside. If not method of arranging room or opening conversation A normal sign should be used to denote danger. Possibility of limiting times for calling and only showing sign then. xiii. Aconstant watch should be kept premises are under observation and when anyone enters or leaves a check should be made to see that he is not followed and if he is a warning should be arranged. xiv. It may be wise to alter oneTs by different methods in order to avoid attracting attention. Operator and guards should leave saparately and at intervals. xv. In case one set cf premises comes alternative set should be ready with the necessary cover story built up. xvi. If ary person who knows of the they should be evacuated at least temporarily c. General. i. Operator must have cover for work when he is transmitting and for visiting his stations. ii. He should never carry arms unless a situation where there is no cover story e.g. working his set. iii. His pistol should be kept with plan and other suspicious articles should be concealed elsewhere. Copies of messages should only be kept when absolutely necessary and then carefully concealed., 6 A.15.W/X. Au ust 44. iv. He must never undertake other subverv. He his organiser. must have as little direct contasive vi. He should know the minimum number oi organisation and these normally should be coaiined to his own little group of helpers. vii. He must not attempt to organisation than he is told and should know as little as possible of the subversive activities find out more of his organisation  viii. He should report any suspicious incident e.g. if he himself is followed. ix. He must have all the usual emergency made e.g. warning signals hide out drop how to re-establish contact. x. He should know and obey the Security of the Organisation. --0O0  contacts to, V A. 16. August 44.  THE W/g OPERATOR.  i. INTRODUCTION The otgect of this lecture is to point out to Organisers and other Agents in the field the importance of the W/T Operator in the plan of operations and some of the difficulties and dangers he has to contend with in providing you vi th your communications.  Wireless is the quickest and most reliable raeans of communication between the organiser in the field and his base but you must remember that it is probably the chief foim of subversive activity for which the enemy is constantly and most carefully watching.  2. mE IMPORTANCE -OF THE tl/f OPERATOR. a He is the only member of the group who can maintain that essential communications with your base.  b The supply of I /l operators is strictly limited.  c Most w/T operators must have lengthy training in Great Britain.  d In view of the constant watch kept by the enemy to locate wireless transmitters it is essential that you should give every consideration to the demands of the W/l operator regarding the selection of his transmitting site and his other technical requirements.  3 COVER HQR IT/T OPERATOR.  Sometimes he can have' normal cover but it must permit him to carry out his soheds. The times of his scheds are pre arranged and as it is essential that he keeps to these times it may often mean that he can have no cover employment result ing in his having to live partly in hiding. His cover story will than not withstand detailed investigation.  4 THE W/T OPERATOR AT WORK  a Set.  Several types of set are available at the present time of a'size not greater than S D x lT0n x 6 and not exceeding 40 lbs. In weight -exclusive of course of any accumu lators which may be required for emergency working. These sets are camouflaged as suitcases gramophones etc.  b Aerial..  The aerial used is about 20 m. long and similar to that used for ordinary reception and you should rely aipon the decision of the w/f operator for its installation. A  ' wireless aerial used for transmitting work has to be more carefully employed than one used solely for reception and is best located outdoors on high ground away from trees steel buildings overhead transmission lines and electric power stations. An aerial inside a modern steel framed building has a poor chance of success. During his training the W/T operator is given careful instruction ih aerial erection and it is very important that he should be, 2 August 44.  allowed a tree hand to select the best site other  wise your comiflunioations may prove unreliable.  c Power.  The power to drive the wireless set is obtained either from AC electric mains or from a battery and although recharging the battery may not be an easy matter provision should be made for a battery to be made available whenever possible. DC mains are useless and where AC mains are net available special battery charging apparatus can be supplied. The fact that the mains are AC is usually shown on the meter. Accumulators require frequent charging whether in use or not. The methods used may vary according to circumstances. When there' is little fear of detection Petrol-electric or steam generators may be supplied and these will require fuel and maintenance. AC charging units require little or no attention. Where there is no other source of power pedal generators are used either in conjunction  with an ordinary bicycle or as a separate foot driven  unit. The use of these involves long periods of hard  work and the operator should be able to obtain help in this duty. Tap water or rain water is suitable for topping up accumulators if distilled water -cannot be obtained.   Signal Plan.  Before the operator leaves he is given a complete plan shewing all the details of the working of his scheds. call signs frequencies etc. This plan is a very sepret document and is even more important than the  set. The operator must work according to the arrange  ments made in the plan 'but in very exceptional cir  cumstances he can arrange additional times of working to the base. If he Is moved in an area which is con'siderably nearer to or further from Home Station he  may require a new plan. His plan may be of any of the types shown below  r -'--   AB c ..  Main Schedules 1 or 2 every 1 or 2 every 1 or 2 every . day odd day. i even day  . ' . ............ . .L . .......  .. .' - ... 1  Extra Schedules. Any time Up AAny time up -Any time up to 1800 hrs j to 1800 hrs. j to-1800 hrs. on any day. j on .odd days j on even days.  Reception Broadcast lightly between 2100 and 0300 hrs every day. j  Arrangements are sometimes made for operators using  plans type B or C to be given extra schedules on the intervening days if they require them. As times of scheds vary from day to .day arrangements have to be  made concerning-the time at which messages can bo  accepted for transmission.  e Coding.  In some oases the operator will have to encode and, A. 16. August 44 decode the messages but if possible he should only transmit and receive the messages leaving this coding work to the organisers. An opera..or can deal with traffic promptly provided that it is handed in for coding before his main schedule of the day -if  'ho has too much to deal with at this time he can arrange an extra schedule the same day the following day or two days ahead according to his type of plan. During a normal schedule it should be possible to clear a total of 150 groups out if there is nothing from home station. A message of fifty groups can be encoded on LOTP in about half an hour. If a reserve ca de is being used twice this time will be needed. Similar periods will be required for decoding Home Station messages.  5. ENEMY C.E METHODS FOR DEIEO'JING ILLEGAL 'IRANSMIffERS Let us now consider some of the other difficulties for the operator which are outside his control. Ihe enemy has an efficient organisation for detecting illegal Y. ireless transmitting stations. It is in fact one of the moot important features of his C.E system. Generally he employs any or all of the following methods  a Citizens are forbidden to be in possession of wireless transmitting sets.  b His usual C.E informant service will auspicious events and behaviour. It must not be for gotten that this infoxmant service is extremely' . efficient and the smallest negligence may result in disaster.  c Frequent snap controls to detect if being moved from place to place.  d Search of localities where illegal believed to have taken place.  e His interception service will record all messages believed to be illicit and every effort will be made to break down the cypher. In cases where a reserve code involving AZDI is being used care must be exerexs ed  '' 'to avoid the repetition of words and phrases as this may lead to the message being broken down by enemy intercept. The word stop and conventional greet ings at the end of the message should be particularly avoided when this code is in use  f By the use of D.F. equipment.  6. ENEMY METHODS OF D.F'ING. -........--- .nY  In the case-of D.F. it is known that the enemy has a very efficient service for locating illicit transmitting sets and although he will attempt to catch the operator at work these dangers can be reduced to a minimum if ordinary precautions are taken. The enemy is known to employ the' following means  a Numerous fixed D.F. stations to locate the approximate area of the transmitter.  b Many mobile D.F. stations usually camouflaged in small delivery vans with non-metal bodies ambulances laundry vans - in fact any ordinary type of vehicle in general every day use in that particular locality. These vehicles generally work in pairs or threes and are used to localise the whereabouts of the transmitter., A. 16. 4 August 44. e Hand carried D.F. apparatus for use in places v/hich cannot be reached by car. She apparatus can be carried out of sight under an overcoat. d Slow-flying aircraft which cruise around in the believed vicinity of the transmitter and may dive low over the station. The electric supply is cut off street by street in the locality where an illegal transmitter is believed to beviTorking Sets exist however with a built-in reserve-accumulator which can be made to function immediately thus-the operator is able to continue transmitting for a short while without interruption and render this method of attempting to localise his position useless. It is easiest to pinpoint an illegal station when it is in the country but on the other hand the enemy has the most numerous D.F. apparatus in the large towns and it is therefore generally agreed that a suburb is probably the safest place. Organisers should make themselves acquainted with all preventive measures to be taken against discovery by enemy D.F. apparatus and assist the operator by acquiring and passing oh to him all information on existing D.F. stations in the area and on all new methods of detection1 which are being adopted. 7. W/T OPERATORS' PKB0AUI10IS. m '-  The operator must continually protect himself against enemy C.S. and he should always remember the following points a He must have cover for being absent from his work when he is transmittingand for visiting his stations. b If possible ho should have several sets in different localities and use them at different times and on different days. c Alternatively he Should arrange for his set to be moved from place to place whenever opportunity arises and as often as' possible. d It is essential' that he should have friends'to watch for him to warn him of the approach of mobile D.F. stations and to help him move his set. Ho should not transport it himself. Wireless sets are more easily replaced than operators. The operator should where possible recruit and train his team of watchers him self. Watchers and operator should arrjve at the station by different routes and at intervals watchers should not hang about near the site in between transmissions. From the site the team of watchers should be in a position to observe the approach of D.F. cars. Power ful binoculars should be obtained'if possible for this purpose. The operator should keep his. pistol with the set. His plan and other compromising material should be concealed elsewhere. Copies of messages should only be kept when absolutely necessary and then very carefully concealed., Av 16. -oAu ust 44.  Seither the operatorix r the watchers should he in possession of arms when proceeding to the site or when leaving it hut a small store of arms hiould ho hid'den near the site together w.ith spare parts reserve batteries binoculars etc.  g A golden rule that everyone must remember is that a w/f operator should be off the air as long as possible and on the air for the shortest possible time. This means that messages muht be explicit and concise and that all superfluous words must bo eliminated. In normal circumstances a schcd should not last longer than 20 or 30 minutes.  8. RELATIONS EhTWEEN ORGAKISEH AID W/f OPERATOR. The TiT/T operator is one of the most valuable members of an organisation. If he is caught the safety of all his associates is endangered. The leader should therefore do everything possible to protect him and the organisation from the consequoncics of suspicion falling upon him. Organisers should bear in mind the following points  a There should be as little as possible direct contact between the organiser and the Y//T Operator. The operator should know the minimum number of members of the organisation. Communication between him and the rest of the group should be through a boite-auxlettreo or cut-out. Nevertheless where the operator must know some of the members he should not know their real names or residences. Meetings should be as few as possible. The w/T operator should know as little as 'possible of the subversive activities of the organisation.  t The organiser should give the operator only really urgent messages. There should be whenever possible a second line of communications other than W/T for . less important communications. Remember the longer the operator is on the air at a time the greater his danger. Sending even short messages may at times be quite a long job if the conditions are difficult and corrections-have to be obtained and given. The greatest possible use of crack signals should be made.  The usual emergency arrangements must be made for the operator as in the case of all other agents i.e. address in neutralL country for communication escape line etc.  While there is a tendency on the part of organisers to regard the W/T operator as a man who is awkward by nature it must be remembered that he is bound by the conditions of his signal plan. It is also true that many operators are quite young and lack stability moreover being technicians they often lack moderation and patience hence the cut-out in his dealing with the operator should show tact and understanding. A special problem is that of the operator who wishes to take part in'activities other than his own task of essential communication this should be strictly forbidden.  Organisers can assist their operators in the following matters though it should be born in mind that the operator must be capable of looking after himself and not call upon his chief for everything  a Finding spare parts for the set arranging repairs, A. 16 Augdat 44  and selecting safe houses for transmission.  1 Assisting in the recruiting of watchers helping to tra n them arm and equip them.  A-..- I c Assisting in the transportation of the set from one site to another.  d Recharging of batteries and provision of reserve batteries.  e The operator should bo given facilities for keeping his set clean and in good condition. He may require to do minor repairs in this case a primus stove will be needed for heating1 the soldering iron.  f As the operator may be working several schedules a day and listening to broadcasts at night he .will have little time for maintenance or battery charging. He should not be given other duties except in an emergency' otherwise he will get little rest.  g Messages should always he ready in time to be trans mitted at next schedule otherwise it is necessary to fix an extra schedule so involving the operator in extra work and danger from D.F ing.  9. SPECIAL DAHGER. The enemy seeks to catch the V//1 operator red-handed. If he succeeds he will bring the utmost pressure to bear upon him to reveal all his secrets in. order that he may be played back. The enemy can most easily play him back if he caiijbe  persuaded to co-operate. The W/f operator may therefore not be executed but in order to assist the enemy bullied and bribed with the promise of his life.  Ho one can be relied upon to resist' pressure of this sort Security checks are therefore pre-arranged. By this means a wireless operator who has been caught and is being played back can make known to the recipients of his messages that they are sent under enemy pressure. This ho can easily do without the enemy's knowledge. These checks are very secret.  The organiser must also advise the base at once if he believes that. the Tf/T. operator has been caught and is being played back.  -oOo, A. 17. May 44.   EXTERHAL COMMTOICAJIONS.  ITOODUCTIOU.  Wifeless has already been discussed in a separate lecture. But alternative me'tiaods must be considered. W/l is not a suitable medium for long' messages and for various reasons or accidents an agent may find himself without w/T communications.  In considering alternative methods there are two .phases to bear in mind viz  a Present day conditions when most of the normal life and communications of the country are functioning.  b Invasion or battle conditions when railways and posts will probably not be functioning for civilian use neutral frontiers may be closed etc. As. the hour of invasion approaches the enemy is certain to put every obstacle in the. way o I clandestine communication- with agents in the field. Organisations will have to prepare for this by having'as many means as possible available.  Therefore consider  1. a POST. Letters are written to an accommoda.tion 'address in a neutral country. The neutral recipient should not lenow the real purpose of the letter and may think it a communication from an innocent person to a friend in allied territory. The recipient is not liable for serious penalties for complicity never theless as external censorship Is strict for his own protection and to ensure quick deliverythe sender should remember the following points  1. Apparent innocence and inconspicuousnoss of the letter are even more essential than for internal mail. Hear E. Department. ii. Writer s name and address Should be concealed  Of. Letters for Internal Delivery . Whore letters for abroad must be presented open at the Post Office and sender identify himself .o. cohsidor use. of cut-out.  iii. All regulations should be eompliedawith in order to avoid delay or destruction of letter. M'.B. It is found that post-cards are more reliable and more quickly delivered than ordinary Letters. . '  Disadvantage of mail is that in times of crisis o.g D-day all external post may be stopped or. letters destroyed  b TELEGRAMS ALP TiLBHIOHES. ' '  Limited use is made of telegrams with pre-arranged code or crack signal.  Telephone is dangerous and usually impossible, A. 17. 2 - May 44. COURIER SERVICE. It is a useful means of sending certain typos of message e.g. routine reports any urgently required plans documents and material which cannot he sent hy w/l. Courier lines from occupied to neutral countries arc already established and where necessary organisations are put in touch with them t ' ' rKii-bi Aa '' ' Method of convoying messages .as far as tho ..frontier is identical with that for intorrial courier services except  that more relays are required. For crossing the frontier various'methods are available. i. Acourier man diplomat'U transport employee farmer or ucrlcman with frontier pass etc.. ii -1 A courier iii. A dead on a train or vehicle crossing the frontier and retrieved by a member of tile organisation on the far side. of. Use .of dead courier for internal communications . . K.B. Mossages are sometimes carried by agents going to or leaving the.field. Disadvantages of a ocurierJservic'd. is that travel particularly across frontiers .is/lihely to be severely curtailed'or prohibited in tim'e's U'f crisis .e. g. D-day. WIRELESS TEEEMOIIIC GOMMUKICATIOl'I.' 11- 1X .v 'y ' At the request of an organiser in1 .t' ie'field a member of his section may be sent over by plaJaie Ur motor beat to talk to him by wireless telephone. Special training is required for the setting up'nlhd use of the apparatus. Where. necessaTy. organisations are supplied with a person competent to carry-out this sort of comWiunication. Such a form of communication can only bo used on very rare occasions because  . a it requires to be carefully arranged in advance and a certain amount of notice must be given b it endangers the aeroplane and.its crew c the'danger to the agent on the.ground is obvious. An additional disadvantage of this foirn of communication is that in times of 'crisis ' O.g. 'D-day the danger to motor boats and single aircraft may be greatly increased and movement at night pa.rticulr.iiy in coastal areas very difficult indeed.' xiu-thermore 't'iio. organicatiox of such conversations w-ould bo increaslfigly'difficult. CARRIER PIGEOIjS AIiD PHONOGRAPHY. . . / J il 1 Pigeons offer a very useful alternative mOthfed '. of communication in conjunction jwi th'ainiaturd or microphotography very long messages can.be sent.by a singlebird . ., A. 17. a PhotofiTapliy.  A pigeon can easily carry a spool of 35 mm. iilm containing 36 frames or exposures each about the size of two postage stamps. On each frame it is possible to photograph from one to sixteen pages of foolscap typewriting. If micro-photeg raphie methods are resorted to a whole issue of Bradshaw could be reproduced and sent by a single pigeon.  b Pigeons'.  The advantages of pigeons are  i. They  e.g. trains posts etc. .and are 'therefore unaffected by temporary chaos. ii. They iii. If difficult to spot the-release of a. bird at'' dawn from say a fo rm in the country. The disadvantages-are l  i. They' security measures must be adopted. ii. .. The pigeon has its enemies -e.g. cats and rats in captivityfalcons and farmers with shotguns while on throwing.  iii They dixnnot fly during fog or -darkness and bad weather will greatly reduce their Speed.  iv. Delivery ovary moon period so that during the last week  ox the period pigeons may not be available. Furthermore .supplies may be held up owing to failure of delivery  A few facts about carrier pigeons  i. They If they arc benighted they will perch and continue the journey at first light. ii. A 300 miles this can be greatly extended dtirfrig the oarly summer. iii. They four days and loose in an attic or shed at least fourteen days This can be extended to three and even four weeks with proper care.  iv. They and also a certain amount of knowledge of handling is required. B.B.C. Messages from this country are sent as oracle signals in the programme of the country whore the recipient is wo rking. The advantage of this method is that it is impossible to 3cert-.in for whom the message is intended., A 17  4 May 44.  The disadvantages are as follows  .'' r- t-' /  a Replies cannot he sent by the same means.  b In times of crisis e.g. Dr-day electric current may be cut off or W/T sets confiscated.  c listening in to foreign broadcasts is illegal and the law may become more severely enforced.  d Sets in occupied countries ore wearing out and cannot be replaced.  R.B. In order to overcome these difficulties special midget receiving sets are now being supplied. 6. ADVgRTISISMEITS IM THE PRESS. Are sometimes used as a means of communication abroad.  '  Of. Internal Communications . Hev/spapers published in occupied territory are received in neutral countrios shortly afterwards and can be delivered in Great Britain a few days later. Advertisements published therein can he used as crack signals to indicate a safe arrival or that certain events have taken or arc about  to take place.  The disadvantage of this means of communication is that in times of crisis the ' export of newspapers from occupied to neutral countries may be greatly curtailed or prohibited. In. any case the publication of advertisements is likely to be much delayed.  7. CtBHERAL PRECAUTIOHS. Bor external messages the same precautions must be taken as for internal. Particularly dangerous is th.e risk that as a result of penetration the enemy will send false messages from the field. Signs should be arranged to prove that messages are genuine.  r-oOo,  A REVISION PROBLEMS.  Lectures 1S-17.  3. A and B are two 'agents working in the same circuit known to each other A wants to contact B in a week's time. What security arrangements would he make with B for this R.V. 9. What places are recommended as meeting places and are to be avoided 10. Give examples of general precautions to be taken effecting meetings between a agents who know each other  b agents who do not know each other  c agents and persons outsi&e organisations  11. You have 2 agents working for you who must not and therefore must maintain communications by the use of Cut- Outs and Boites-aux-Lettres. Explain to them the use and choice of these. 12. Give some examples of precautions to be taken when using i ordinary post ii telephone. 13. What general precautions are required in all communications 14. You are going to look for some premises in a town for your subversive activities. What sort of places are you going to look for what considerations are necessary in making your choice and what security precautions must you take when using these premises 15 You are an organiser who has finished his mission and you are handing over to one of your staff-officers before returning to England. He will be using your w/l Operator. Explain to him the difficulties and.dangers of the Operator and how he will maintain contact with him.  J.5 W/x You have trained a reserve operator who will take over from  J you. Explain to him the use and choice of premises and precautions to take and any special security precautions you think necessary., A. 18c August 44.  ORGAN a&II01.  1. INTRODUCTION. There are three possibilities open to an organiser sent t  the field. He will be sent to an area where   i ...   a. he Imows a number of influential people whom he will contact and recruit  b. he is furnished with names and addresses of people to contact and recruit to help him start -his organisation c. there is already an organisation in being either organised locally or by an agent sent out from' here. He would either take over from a local man or act as his assistant. At this stage of the war the question of setting up a new organisation on virgin territory would hardly arise ' However it is essential for an agent to know how an organisation sh.ou.ld be built up in case he should ever have to do it himself.  He should also know on what lines an organisation which he may join has been built up.  Therefore the question will be studied from the position of  an organiser setting up an organisation starting from scratch. It must be realised however that one cannot expect to find every organisation in the field built up along exactly the same lines as given here -the principles nevertheless will be the same.  2. BUILDING UP OF ORGANISATION -  iV '  Before attempting any subversive activities at all an organiser  must establish communication with the home base. For this purpose he normally takes his w/T Operator with him. .Having  set up the Operator and made contact with London he can go on to the next important step which is to vet the contacts  mentioned in a and b above. He can then start planning  his organisation.  A. Survey of Area. This must be done before plunging into operations and he  must consider the following points  a. Geographical areas. b. Groups economic social political national religious subversive . c. Opinions -e.g anti-Axis feeling rivalry between groups. d. Individuals -especially leading personalities e. Enemy C.E. forces. This survey would enable him to decide where and how to organise subversive activities -e.g propaganda is best organised by groups a military organisation must be formed on a geographical basis the presence of low, A. 18. 2 - August 44.  morale or strong enemy C.E. may preclude any activity in a certain district.  B. Blaming of Sections. ' The next step would he to decide what sections are needed  to carry out the projected activities.    The Organiser would bo sent out with a prearranged mission to set up pnQ or other of the following types of organisation  i. Propaganda. ii. Passive Rosistanoe and Minor Sabotage. Hi. Major Sabotage  iv. Para-military. In order to keep these groups functioning an organiser would  need a number of agents formed in groups or sections of  varying numbers. These might include any or all .of the  following  i. External Communications. This section which may consist merely of a w/f Operator will look after communications between the organiser and his H.Q . in this country see Communications . It is the moot important section and should be established before any other.  ii. Reception Section. . If the organiser wishes to obtain personnel and supplies from abroad he will need agents who can meet transport and look after them -e g. farmers peasants estate owners.  ill. Storage and Distribution. .  v  It may be necessary to find persons who can afford storage facilities in other places -e g. ironmongers builders priests warehousemen.  E.33. As far as possible the location of the stores should bo kept unknown to the men Y/ho are going to use them. It may be advisable to have only a few main storage places but to prepare in addition dis tribution centres where stores may be picked up for an operation. iv. Transport. For any fairly large-scale organisation of sabotage or para-military operation transport facilities v/ould be needed. For this purpose men connected Yrith transport services or firms using trucks vans etc. v/ould be useful.  v Internal Communications.  This section v/ill be responsible for communications within the Organisation which may include many  I, A. 18 August 44.  different methods see Communications .  vi. Security One of the most important 1' The Section can he divided into three departments  a. Centre C.E. responsible for watching and reporting on enemy C.E personnel and methods. b. People in a position to supply papers and documents passes etc. c. People responsible for the Security of - Operations and of individuals. Here con in the police are extremely useful. The members of one department vould not necessarily know the members of others'. vii. Emergency Measures. This section would prepare hide-outs safe houses  and escape facilities for .agents who come under suspicion  viii. Einance . In a large organisation a special section might be  needed to look after the payment of agents. Persons  like bankers and cashiers who can handle large sums of money would be useful.  In a large organisation it may be found advisable to  have a section composed of men who spot talent and  recruit new agents. This may be part of Security Section .  x. Medical Section. Doctors etc to treat casualties  xi. Billeting. People with whom agents can live not the same as those who can offer safe house facilities.  xii. Black Market. A contact with the Black Market can be very useful e. g for supplying clothing petrol food etc.  xiii. Welfare. Might form part of the Finance'Section -consisting of people who would look after.the families of agents in case o f trouble etc.  H.B. These sections may comprise a. large number of. agents or they may merely consist of one or two. The important .thing is that each section should be organised separately., A. 18 -4   Avigust 44  3' gQRMIMG THE MJCL US.  Having decided what sections he will need the Organiser will next have to select and recruit a small number of staff .officers  i.e. men who will talce charge of one or more of the sections'. to be formed. These men will form the nucleus of the Organisation round the Organiser and its success depends ultimately on them even if some activities are smashed new ones can always be built up provided that the nucleus remains unimpaired. Therefore these men must be picked with the utmost care . o They must not be too many in number because the Organiser must limit the number of people with whom he is in contact. There fore in a large Organisation where there are many sections one staff officer taay take charge of several activities and have several section leaders under him.  Most organisers will have a limited mission and will only need to set up a small organisation but the same principles apply and the nucleus is alv/ays all-important.  4. PRINCIPLES OF LAY-OUT. Before enumerating the principles to be followed in planning the lay-out of an organisation in order to achieve the  maximum security it should be pointed out that there is  aly/ays a conflict between security and efficiency.  Security is best achieved by the use of water-tight compartments  whereas efficiency depends upon close liaison. A balance-must  be struck between the two. As it is always possible to reduce security but very difficult to improve it once it is weak it is best to aim at the maximum security from the outset  a. Do not make the organisation too large. Much work  especially passive resistance minor sabotage and propaganda can be done by people outside the organisation at the instigation of its members. .  b. The organiser should deal with only four to six subordinates v/ho will normally be his staff officers . o Leaders of groups or sections will normally do their own recruiting but should furnish fall details  except names to the organiser for approval.  d. Each section must have a clearly defined function and stick to it. But one section may have two tasks e g. Medical Section because of Doctons with permits for cars might be able to provide transport. c. The organiser must determine the minimum number of contacts necessary between sections and prohibit any others. H.B. Over-centralisation is to be avoided as well as too much lateral communication. f. Individual agents should have the minimum number of  contacts 'within the organisation. g. Individual agents should have as little information about the organisation as possible h. Men must be held in reserve to fill key positions in the event of an emergency. i. There should be the maximum use of eut-outs. -oOo, Augugty 44..  THE CELL SYSTEIVL  For many types of subversive activity -e g. propagandapassive resistance etc. -and with all large organisations it is necessary to organise on a basis of cells this strengthens security.  1. DEFIIIIT10IT. A cell is a small group working subversively inside some existing group of individuals -e.g factory party railway workers group workers going into Germany.  The principle is the same as that for the sections the differences being that a section is a subversive group within a large subversive group or organisation.  2. EXPAHS10II. i. One of the most important functions recruit other cells. Best method is for one member of each cell to have duty of recruiting a man outside who will organise another cell. Similarly another man in new cell will recn.it a further cell and so on. ii. As recruiter in first cell is only contact with organiser of second cell security is maintained to the highest degree. Value of this is that in the event of one agent corning under suspicion police will take a long time to trace others and even if part of the organisation is discovered it does not necessarily reveal the whole. iii. An alternative method is by radiation members of a cell recruit the organisers of rziore than one new cell. Quicker expansion.and more direct communication but security reduced. iv. Chain system most suitable for requiring complicated orders or exact timing -o.g.  passive resistance radiation system host where speed and co-ordination are essential -e.g. secret armies.  3. COETRO'L. i. Policy must be laid down from the uniformly throughout organisation. ii. Ho coll is superior to others passed on from above. iii. Field of recruitment for each chain limited -.e.g. one department in a factory -so that each group of cells is kept separate from others and under control of agent appointed to look after it. iv. The organiser should limit the number formed in each department or group. The cell members will be the shock troops influencing outsiders to undertake subversive action also of. 4 a. above ., A. 19 -2 -   August 44.  4. INTERNAL V70BiaHG i Number.  A cell should contain only a small number of  individuals three to eight .  ii. Distribution of Functions. The cell as a whole will have a special function according to the general policy from above but each member can also have a special function. Here is a possible lay-out for a cell of five members  a. Chief of Cell -responsible for liaison. b. Security of the cell though each member is responsible for reporting immediately any suspicious incident e.g absence of a cell member from work. e .. Information -perhaps on. orders from above information on a specific target is wanted -All cell members might contribute Ho. 3 collate before passing on to chief.  d. Material -if active operations are planned. e. Liaison down to next cell. 5. PLAHS FOR JMERGEli'CY. Plans must he laid in advance for the possibility of a break in a chain of cells which would leave some cells isolated. Possibilities are  i. General directives on the policy that eventuality. ii. The linking of the last cell in organiser of the whole chain thus making it circular. iii. Emergency address -e.g. to appear in an-agreed paper or boite-aux-iQttr.es 6 COHCLUSIOH.  i. The cell system has obvious disadvantages -viz. slowness inefficiency remote control. ii nevertheless it is the only system of large-scale organisation that affords the necessary degree of security.  iii. It is particularly suitable for of simple activities -e.g. propaganda passive resistance minor sabotage strikes -and also for ground work preparatory to an armed revolt. It may also be used for penetrating existing organisations and influencing their policy and activities. oOo-, A. 20 August 44.  SEOURITY 0F 0.HG-MISATI0K.  1. INTRODUCTION The security of the organisation as a whole depends on the security of individual agents. The principles set out in the lecture should be learnt by every member of the organisation and particular care should be taken to ensure that recruits know them understand them y and understand the reason behind each one. v  2. SECURITY STANDING ORDERS. i. No member will be told more about the organisation than is necessary for him to do his job. ii. No member will attempt to find out more about the organisation than he is told. iii. Each member will have a specific jo-b or jobs and will not undertake any other without orders. N.B. Danger of over-enthusiastic or lonely agent wanting to do too much work work fqr which he is not suited or work which will bring him into contact with too many people. t'. iv. Members must only use service names of all other members I  r. No member will recognise another member in public for other than duty purposes unless they are supposed to know each other in every-day life. vi. No member will make a recruit or contact another organisation unless ordered to do so. No member will carry arms unless a cover story is  impossible e.g. during wireless transmission or  receptions. Where an agent carries a weapon he  must be ready to use it.  viii. Every member will clothes and effects to ensure that he has nothing compromising which can be found. ix. Every member is that he is not followed. x. Every member will If he thinks he is suspect himself he must ensure that in so doing he does not bring suspicion on another. xi. Safety signals Danger should always be indicated by something normal generally the absence of a safety signal. xii. Strict punctuality ' i  xiii. N t more than two time., A. 20. 2 Au st 44 xiv. Passwords and oountersigns will be given exactly arranged and no variations accepted. xv. For every journey met ting or conversation cover story will be prepared in advance xvi. Every member must know what to do in case op see belov/. 3 EMERGENCY ACTION. A Organisers. Organisers-must so far as possible have plans ready for an emergency. The essential thing in an emergency is to act quickly as there is often little or no time to plan when the occasion arises. The organiser must con sider the-following points a. Decide what contacts plans and places are affected b. Warn'the contacts to take their pre-arranged measures c. Postpone or drop any activities that are affected d. Clean up any places that are affected -i.e destroy  r conceal material and documents cease to use R.V.'s e. Possibly send a message to H.Q . in this country f. If an agent has been arrested find out the reason for his arrest and whether ho has talked. g. Help the arrested agent to. escape if it can be done without-prejudicing the security of the organisation. B. Other Agents. Each member of the organisation should know the following  a what warning signals will bo used b. what other members he must warn himself' c. where to go hide-out cover story etc. d. what contacts and activities he must drop o. how to re-establish contact. N.B. i. This will not always preclude the necessity of giving him further orders when the emergency arises. ii. Where an agent is put in contact with an escape line he raust be told that ho will strictly adhere to all instructions givenby members of that line 4. CQBCLTJSIQB. Security is essential for the existence of a clandestine organisation and all responsible members of the organisation should constantly be on the look out for breaches of the above rules which should never go unnoticed' and should aeway-s be brought tr the notice of the offender.  oOo, A. 21 July 44. KECRTJITII\iG  . IlItRODUCglOM. The success of an organisation depends on good recruiting. Bad recruiting is fatal both to efficiency and security. Consequently recruiting must be done with extivycae caxition and afta-r careful deliberation in every single case.  2. TYPES OF RECRUITS. Distinguish between different types of recruits or helpers required. An isolated service o.g procuring a permit over looking an infringement of the law. Occasional services o.g. agreeing to give some-one a night's lodging from time to time lending a bicycle or a farm cart occasionally. Part-time agents e.g. Reception Committees people who lend their houses for.wireless transmissions. Full-time agents c g. assistants couriers cut-outs etc. In a and b yho helpers do not join the organisation and may not evojn t e t n fl. r / wAio-to. Therefore they are less dangerous than c and d who ha-o to knoviT something hov/ever little of the organisation's activities. Even so great care must be exercised in securing the amallest service. 3. PARSERS OF RECRUITIEG. a Unnecessary or excessive recruiting make an organisation too largo which is bad for security. b Unsuitable men may be recruited e.g. men with inadequate technical knowledge for job men who are indiscreet men who cannot get on with others and cause friction men who turn out to be weak either because they arc feeble characters or in a position which makes them susceptible to pressure from the Germans c The new recruit may be a doxible agent out to penetrate the organisation d. The recruit may already be suspect or blown because of previous resistance wo i-Tr or pol.ition.'i religious or social activities. 4. PREmttllARY STAGES OF RECRUITIRG. a Make sure an extra recruit is really necessary and do not recruit him if he is not indispensable It is always bad to recruit someone for whom there is no work at the moment simply because he is capable and likeable. A man with nothing to do becomes bored and indiscreet. b Look around for potential recruit in likely quarters e.g. People known personaxij--t.i organiser or to his colleagues possibly alx'oo.dy noixo-d as potential recruits. /, A. 21 2  July 44.  People v/iiose profession or 'background make them suitable for the job to be done.  c Select one or more possible recruits and. consider carefully the following points  i Qualifications including specialist knowledge and facilities for doing work especially cover.   UB. If a man is recruited for a specific job the cover problem becomes much easier than if one recruits a man and later has to find him a job for which his existing cover is suitable.  ii What has been his attitude to the German.q9  iii Weaknesses of character or situation. Is he indiscreet vain overgiven to drink or women Has he close relations who are either held as hostages or collaborators Is he specially vulnerable to German pressure Study his family background.  All these points should be considered over a period and information obtained and confirmed by observation discreet questioning of acquaintances reference to section in TJ.K. etc  In certain cases a special check should be made on particular points e.g self-styled escaped prisoners of war or workers should be treated with grave suspicion-People who have done resistance work should be carefully vetted to make sure they are not already suspect. In the case of people who have apparently done no previous resistance work/ find out why not and why they are now prepared to consider it at this late stage. Beware of people who openly express a desire to do resistance work.  d If the recnj.it is found suitable in other respects consider whether he is likely to agree to work for the organisation and if so what will be his motive.  B.Bc i. Hot all common motives are good ones. ii. People almost always act from mixed motives but there is usually one which 'dominates the rest. The following are possible motives  i Petriqtisra  An essential motive though not necessarily the  only one   l ii Pieligious political or soeial ideals  May be good motives but danger of opposite extremists causing trouble within the organisation or of fanatics trying to divert organisation's policy to suit their aims, A. 21. 3 July 44. iii Personal hatred of enemy  Good if cold and calculating had if hot and  impetuous.  1v Personal grudge against individuals  Bad motive for permanent agent but can sometimes  be exploited to get an odd job done.  v Personal affection for a member of the organisation  Very dangerous motive -cooling ardour may lead to denunciation through jealousy or if one partner is arrested the other may tell all to save him.  Sometimes desirable to recruit a married couple  vi Need  As an additional motive supplementing patriotism may be satisfactory Distinguish between need and greed.  vii Material the war e.g. medals. post-v/ar jotT.  Onljr admissible if reinforced by patriotism.  Do not make rash promises.  viii Re-i  Beware the former attentiste or collaborator who wants to avoid the penalty for past misdeeds. This class can sometimes be usefully exploited for an odd service  ix Blac  A bad motive except for an odd service. Dangerous  to press too far.  x Lqye  May be exploited to get isolated acts done or to recruit an isolated ceil to attack a particular target or to recruit members for a rnaquis. Bad motive tor recruiting permanent agents for subversive work proper  xi Avoidance  A bad motive unless combined with patriotism  except perhaps for a maquis.  xii To escape  Bad. Wanted men are dangerous and ex-criminals  are particularly unreliable  5 CHOICE OF RBCPJJJT5RS.  Depends on the case but generally speaking the principle should be that agents are recruited by their immediate superior., A 21. 4 July 44.  a An organiser should recruit his own assistants hut  i. Where he does not. know the district he may recruit a lieutenant who knows the area and entrust this joh to him. ii. He may get some or all of them from the U.K. b Each assistant will recruit either directly or through a chosen deputy his immediate subordinates.  c Similarly each subordinate will recruit his own group.  K.B. Ho agent will recruit anyone without his chief's permission but should report likeljr recruits to his chief. 6. ACTJAh RBCPJJITIHG-. a The recruiter should go himself or revealing that he belongs to an organisation He should always retain the initiative and be able to withdraw if the potential recruit is unreceptive.  Try and get recruit to show willingness without  directly asking him. Lead the conversation round  to talk of the Germans and resistance and test  reactions.  H.B. Recruit should never be persuaded against his will or deceived as to risks. He should fully appreciate dangers and should think he has joined of his own initiative.  b Recruiter should then actually enrol the recruit impressing him with the wealth and power of the organisation but giving him very little real information.  c If the recruiter does not belong to the section in which the recruit is to be employed he should not see him again and the recruit1should hot-know his name or address.  d N. B. Two recruiters may be necessary.  i One to sound the recruit and ascertain if he is willing.  ii One to do the actual recruiting.  7 AFTER RECRTJIT1HG.  a Administer oath of allegiance in suitable cases.  b Give him a harmless job -to tes t him and make him feel compromised.  e Give him necessary training.  i Personal Security.  Practically every aspect of security is applicable to the new recruit -viz.  Cover -point out that he has been recruited, A. 21. 5 July 44. t° do a certain job because he has the necessary cover and therefore must do nothing to compromise it. Alibis of course absolutely essential.  Information -particularly about enemy C.iC. methods -their dangers and the protection against them. Detective measures etc.  Vigilance Alertness Observation G-ood  memory -indispensab1e .  Inconspicuousness -Stress the grave dangers of altering his previous mode of living.  Discretion and Discipline -Indispensable.  Plan for Emergency -Indispensable.  ii G-eneral Security  E.g. precautions against following rules for contacting etc. iii Organisati  The new recruit must know those and realise they are orders and therefore must be obeyed.  iv His job.  Any special training for his particular job  e.g. wireless operator's bodyguard store keeper etc. . COHChUSIOH.  Most of the above relates to recruiting for a purely subversive organisation. For paramilitary or maquis organisations certain points will not always apply e.g. cover but never theless great care is still necessary to avoid penetration and the principles indicated should be followed as far as possible.  - o0o, A. 22 July 44 ACrEEi' MANACtMEIIT AMD DISCIPLINE.   imphoductioi.  It is essential Doth for security and efficiency that an organisation should run smoothly. Po achieve this there should really he close liaison between officers and sections whereas security demands water-tight compartments and maximum use of cut-outs. An organiser has thus to try and .inspire non.fid.en.oe in and exert control over men he should never see. A. RELATIONSHIP OF ORGANISER PO SHBORDIKAPE. The organiser should be to his agents what'a good Company Officer is to his men or a good employer to his workmen i.e. he should be really interested in their welfare and they should feel this. He should be a strict but just disciplinarian. It is his job to maintain order keenness and security i.e. to cope with all the human.troubles that may arise e.g. jealousy slackness selfishness boredom loneliness nervous strain etc. But for security reasons he must achieve all this without diroct contact with most of his men. The following points should he remembered  a The organiser should inspire with whom he deals direct bjr showing interest in them setting q good example in security austerity selfcontrol giving clear precise orders foreseeing emergencies and fulfilling promises. He should make it clear that he expects his subordinates to behave in this way towards their own subordinates. He and they should always prepare very carefully before interviewing subordinates.  b The necessity for cut-outs and must be impressed on newcomers who should be told bimt this system is the best guarantee of their own personal safety and that they v/ill only be given such information as is necessary for them to do their job.  c Special consideration should lonely isolated jobs who see few colleagues and that very rarely e.g w/T Operator. An occasional friendly message or some small gift is very useful to make him realise he is not forgotten.  1 Very oooasionaily an organiser or his lieutenant may assist incognito at a dangerous operation especially if it is the first undertaken by a particular group. The men can be told later that their chief was with them. Alternatively he may arrange to speak to agents without their seeing him cf. A. IS . In extreme cases requiring urgent personal contact he might see an agent but pretend to be only a cut-out. All this is bad security but an occasional risk can be justified by its immense moral effect.  e Agents who fall sick or have to hide should be looked after e.g. sick pay care of dependants escape facilities.  3. PAYMENT.  Each section has its own system of payment and it is important to make students realise that any general principles given here must be adapted to fit this system. Care should be taken NOT, A. 22. 2 July '44. to give the impression to students that they will have vast sums of money at their disposals  a So far as possible all agents should be paid a regular wage not necessarily the same . fhis creates the impression of belonging to an army which is good fo discipline. Piece rates lead to excessive claims and disputes.  b Do not fix rates of pay too high at the beginning. If you find you have a reserve you can always raise them later.  c If an agent is unwilling to accept pay do not insist but give him presents perhaps in kind and allow generous expenses.  d Distinguish between pay and expenses. The latter should be generous. Proof of expenditure in the form of receipts cannot be required for security reasons. As regards payments arrangements may be made e.g. by displaying a signal to indicate receipt of an important sum  e Payment best made in advance by cut-out at a pex-aonal meeting. Periodical y/amings about excessivo expenditure should be given.  f Agents should be warned at the start that it may not always be possible to pay on time. If this happens tell agent frankly when payment.can be expected  g Do not permit financial disputes. If an agent appears to be claiming too much discuss it amicably. If he still insists pay him in full but make it clear that similar demands -in future will be regarded as blackmail.  h.- Bonuses for good work may be given with discrimination especially in kind.  i Do not let one agent know what another receives.  4. DISCIPLINE. a Discipline ican only be secured and maintained by efficient leadership and good recruiting leading to mutual confidence. It is unsupported by disciplinary powers since except in a maquis the only real sanction open to the organiser is the death penalty which should only be employed in extreme eases see below .  b The recruit should be told that although he only knows a few members he belongs to a vast and powerful organisation which is well able to safeguard its members and punish traitors. This should be stressed as safeguarding his own security not quoted menacingly as though he were a potential traitor.  c The general attitude to work should be that operations are only undertaken where there is a reasonable chance of success. Therefore success should be the normal result and while reasonable credit should be given for good work the organiser should not be over-prodigal with praise after every operation., A 22  r  o   d If an operation fails the organiser should imraed.lately find out why. If due to had luck or unpredictable changes in the situation he should shew sympathy and encouragement. If due to in efficiency ascertain the cause. If it is due to overwork or nerves make the agent take a rest and continue to pay him. If it is due to stupidity or real ineffioiency either find him a mono suitable job if this can be done without danger to security or tell him he is suspect and must lie low or have him taken out of the country.  e In extreme cases a dangerously insecure or un disciplined man should be sent out of the country or killed.  f If a man says he is being blackmailed by the enemy cheek his story and if it is true get him out of the country.  g If treachery is suspected a swift but -careful specie must be made. A proved traitor must always be killed.  h In cases where an execution is necessary it must be carried out with great care and no traces left which can point to the organisation. A murder if discovered will be thoroughly investigated even by loyal police   who often will not know the reason for it and even if they do will--have to show zeal and even if all traces of the execution are destroyed a man's disappearance may set up a hue and cry. It is sometimes best to stage an apparent suicide or accident.  It must be impressed on all members that executions are only to be undertaken on receipt of specific orders from the chief.  f  i Care must be taken'to avoid giving grounds for criticism and discontent. Rewards and praise must both be fairly allocated. Particular care should be given to ensuring equal distribution of comforts received from the iJ K.  5. TRAIIIIG. a All members should receive adequate training when recruited. See A.21 .  b Training should be kept up to date e.g apy new information about C.E. personnel or methods new sabotage methods etc. should be passed on.  6. SECURITY. The security of everyone including the organiser should be checked from time to time. Agents should know this may happen but should not know when ho breach of security however small should go unnoticed or unchecked.  7. PROMOTION-. The question should rarely arise at higher levels since assistants and lieutenants are normally recruited direct by, A. 22. July 44. 4 organisers. At lower levels from a seerritv nrn'nf view it is best to promote someone aireaoVin the section wl SS f J y0USy or reactions on two a n s  wno know each other in ovorvei ir \ -ii- Q -or. ' t--ooncs may either resent working uket one of his clerks oTS f shmi him too much respect at work. -v a . may 8 OOhCLUSIOh XLe \/holc hey to. good discipline in an organisation lies 1o of personality of the organiser and his choice of oapabie subordinate loaders. Anyone who exercises command oyer others muse constantly set a good example to hie subordinates at all times and any slacknSs in a siihordina te  commander must he checked at onoo. suDoraina  oOo-,  A REVISIOM PROBLEMS.  Lectures 18-22.  16. Give a list of security rules to Be learned by all members of the organisation. 17. You have recruited the Manager of a factory and you want him to set up a Cell System working on Passive Resistance among his workers. Explain to him the method to adopt. 18. What are the chief's responsibilities in case of emergency 19. You badly need an Informant inside the local Administration  e.g. Police Town Hall Prefecture etc. . You know of a likely man but do not know much about him yourself. Your lieutenant has a reliable friend who knows the man fairly well. Give instructions to your lieutenant to get full infonaation about him indicating the sort of things you want to know. 20. You have received all the necessary information about your man from your lieutenant now recruit him.  I.B. One student will take the part of the man to be recruited and another student the part of the recruiter.. The Instructor will say what information the lieutenant has obtained . 21. You have recruited a man who travels around the country a lot on business. During his travels he visits three towns where you have agents working and he will act as a courier for you. What special instructions must you give him for this job It is assumed that he has had his personal Security Training. 22. You have recruited an elderly lady who has a medium-sized house in the country and two trustworthy servants. She will be your Safe House keeper. Give her instructions for her job., FIML A RLVXSIOL PEPJQDS.  1st Period  S3. What security habits should you have acquired which you should maintain and practise during the rest oi your stay in the U.K. so that they are automatic when you are in the Field  2nd Period  To be used by Instructor for general Revision or  Revision on particular points on which students  appear to require further instruction., A 25. April 1944.  FINiiL ADDRESS. PITROroCTIOIT. This lecture is to give you practical advice as to v/hat you c n do during the rest of your stay in this country during your journey abroad and the first feu days of your stay there. There are three main things which you have to think about before you leave cover mission papers.  cam.  a Learn your cover story perfectly. Think out thp answers to all quest ions which may arise in connection nvith it. It is on the small details ..hioh you may be caught out.  b Body. Consider particulars discussed in lecture on disguises .  c Clothes. Consider particulars discussed in locturo. on disguises .  d -Effects. Consider what you should have with you to confirm Some things may bo obtainable on this side but meet of them you . ill have to obtain on arrival.  o H-hit si Be sure that you have picked up no English habits e.g. table .miens j. way. of dressing et c. Talk the language of the country to which you are going as riich as possible MISSION. Enow all details of your mission. Consider what difficulties may arise and hoc you would '.deal with thorn. Apply hat you hove learned hero to those problems PAEERo. Necessary papers will be given to you before .you leave . They rill be perfectly forged but  fii check carefully r ith your cover story  b pay particular attent ion to those parts of your cover story which have special reference to .your papers for .si those you ro most likely to bo questioned. You must know them by heart and  c know how you would have obtained your papers had you como.by then legally  d see they do not look too new unless the date is recent. OPERATIONAL EfUIPMSlTT. Know all details of operational equip .cut where each article is how it should bo used whether it should destroyed or retained. If retained have cover story for its possession. Roj.iQja.bcr there is one article for which no cover story is possible. PISTOL. inly have a pistol with you if no cover story to account for yourself. There is no story to account for a parachute landing. If you become involved with the enemy then you will have to shoot.  'L TABLETS. y FINAL CHECK. You will be searched before you leave. Bo sure that you take nothing with you that could givo you away. It is absolutely forbidden to take private written or verbal messages., 2 -Final Address. 16.3'. 44.' s. jc hney ..arp hriyal. This Nervous tension of journey and parachute roust not make you forget .your security jump produce reaction on landing. a The plane nnlzcs . noise which ray attract the attention of local inhabitants. Tho enemy may be warned and organise a search. Therefore speed and silence arc essential in leaving the landing field. Do not indulge in greetin' or unnooos& ry conversation. Do not offer accept drinks cigarettes chocolate etc. place yourself under the orders the reception committee. or of iO. ATTITUTE TO ASSOCIATES. Although you have undergone an intensive' course of instruction you aro not an oxporioitood agent. Do not therefore irm.edia.tely critic iso ox i sting arrangeuents. People r/ho have had practical experience although no course of instruction ./ill resent such criticism './ait till you have had seme practical GXi .im ..co and proved yourself then your knowledge both of theory and .practice will stand you in good stead. 11. SAFE HOUSES. You will probably spend first .for days .after your arrival in a safe house where you can learn about conditions and avoid the.risk of search 'Do not toll the people you loot there you a parachutist. In the unlikely event of their asking quest ions have a cover story av ilnblo. They may guess the. truth-but flo not want to know it. They will not think better of you for indiscretions but aro loss likely to help you in the future. 12. 'MAORI AT ION. From the moment of your arrival start he airing security information. safe house you can probably obtain much. Then you have a full knowledge of conditions you can start .ork. At th 13. imiSRS. i During the intensive course-of instruction you have received hero -you racy have acquired the impressions th..t in occupied countries one is continually aware of the enemy 0 2. On arrival you my bo surprised to find that you arc much loss conscious of the cnomy than you oxpkctod. Do not lot this tempt you to relax. Relaxation is tlm greatost dongof of all. 14. m ssAq2s. Do not attempt to send directly or indirectly unconnected with your job verbal or writton. to ' private persons  nos sagos 15. S32ING-RELATIONS. Do friends not in any circu. stances attempt to arr ngc personal mootings with a-ny or relations unless you have express instructions and permission to do so. 16 SSCURITT TEACHING. You must regard ns part of your mission the sotting of a good example in security precautions to all members of the organisation with whom you cone in contact. Remember that tils must be'done tactfully and with discretion. Persons who think they have head a lot of expjrionco of subversive activity in the field although they may have had no course of instruction may resent lectures from one whom they may regard as loss experienced th n thomsolves. IV. Do not become discouraged or let your colleagues lose heart because arrangements do not work out as smoothly as you asp acted. The organisation of'reception committees safe houses passwords moot ings etc. is very difficult hitches misunderstandings delays are sbmotimes unavoidable. You must bo prepared to deal with these problems., B.J3. June 1945.  SELECTIDtl OF DROFPIWG POINTS iUD iBRAMGEMBtTTS FOR 'ME RECEPTION OF AGENTS ifflD STORES BY AIR.  '  IxPMOJUOTlON. Agents who are going into the field must Imow how Dropping Points are selected and 7/hat are the limitations on choice of area on account of technical topo graphical and weather considerations. \ Agents should also understand the air point of view as regards both the safct of the carrying aircraft and tlio difficulty .of location and recognition of a particular area by night. TECHNICAL CONSrDinH'JIONB ETC. 1. A good Dropping Point snould be a. An open space not less than 400 a-square and if possible 800 square. b. Of a smooth and level surface if persons are to be dropped. c. On uncultivated ground so as to avoid evidence in the form of foo marks etc. d. Soft but not swampy ground. 0 e. Free from all wires or high-tension cables in the vicinity. f. Free of all tree without trees of any size surrounding the area which might obscure the aircraft s view of the lights. Turning circle of aircraft some 4 miles in diameter and lights must he  visible all the time. g. Away from sharply rising ground hills of 100 m. . Hills of more than 300 ei. should be 10 miles away for night dropping. For these reasons valleys are unsuitable unless several miles wide. The aircraft requires to increase speed from 2S5 k.p.h. up to 290 k.p.h. to climb. This would take several miles. h Near some cover for concealment of personnel and equipment. 2. Weather must be favourable. Usually bright moonlight. Average nigh' available five or six on either side of full moon making eleven or thirteen in all. opor' .on can in favourable circumstances be cam. out without moon but s no very roll/ do landmark such as a largo lab is necessary. Operation will take place on first night of fuvournblweather wlfon aircraft available. 3. lighting. Present r.oxmaJ operational system oAwll Throo red lights in line 100 n. between each light the down wind light duplicated at a distance of 10 m. by a white flashing light. Variations may be agreed for specific operations and the white flashing light will give a recognition signal which will be answered in an agreed manner from the aircraft. Mors signals by torch must bo very slow and distinct. Avoid letters 1 T H I S and V. Lights cro turn' on immediately the sound of the aircraft is hoard end pointed in t mb direction and the aircraft followed round with the lights kept on during the whole operation until the signal for the end of tho operation i& received. Lights should be pointed about]3° ahead of tho direction of tho sound so that tho pilot nay bo looking tui directly as possible down tho light bom. Caro should bo taken to allow if possible for deceptive effects of echoes in the neighbourhood. Practise pointing at sound of aircraft by day  with oyes shut., 4. Drift. Parachutes are released at a.height of 500 feet 160-170 m. and theHaverage drift may he taken as 60/m. down-wind for every 5 m.p.h of windspeed. The highest wind-speed safe for operations is 20 m.p.h. Reception committee is responsible for placing the lights in such a manner as to allow for drift. Aircraft will fly along line of lights against the wind passing first ovex' the white light and thep. releasing the parachutes when vertically over the last X od light. Speed of aircraft lowest of which it is capable  Halifax about 140 m.p.h. 225 k.p.h. . Strength of wind may be judged by committcG by handkerchief method  extend handkerchief hold by comer when on highest ground in neighbourhood if blown just horizontal by the wind speed is about 15 m.p.h. if blown out about 45° below horizontal ' wind is about 10 m.p.h. METHOD OP SELECTION. On very largoscale map of the district  i.e. 1 50 000  with good details 1 75 000 not very serviceable unless with very good details. British Ordnance I'.t i.e 1 63 000 -very good bocauso of great accuracy bur such high standard of map may not always bo available for occupied countries. / eas arc generally selected in the first place by agpnts in the field. In such cases lob.. a are reported to England using the appropriate map referenco system air point of view ta - n into account by consultation in England agree ment or not reported by radio y  Note The systems appropriate to the various Country Sections will bo found in bT5. -Wap Reading' . At the ond of the lecture tudonts knowledge'of their appropriate system should bo chocked by a short tost.  Alp POINT OF VIEW. The R.A.E. must ensure 1. The safety of the carrying aircraft. 2. Certainty of recognition of correct area. 1. Thei Safety of the Carrying Aircraft. To ensure this they must avoid a. Heavily defended areas. b. Enemy aerodromes. c. Sharply rising ground when flying low. t They mist also be sure that the ail .-aft will ho iloar of enemy-occupied territory during the hours of darkness. This last consideration limits opera tions to distant countrios during summer months. 2. Certainty of Rocognition of Cflrrcot Area. To ensure this .the R.A.E. must rely on mapreading as well as on navigational ins s. When talcing position by map-readmg the aircraft will fly at between 500 and 1 000 m. thus running a great risk if vicinity of heavily defended areas and enemy aerodromes h.as not been avoided. Tiio following aids for fixing position on t o map ax'O used as landxiarks a. Coastlino. b. Rivers and canals. Ideal 1th it m. if i rrowor should not bo tree-lined. c. Large lakes of distinctive shape -at Ipaat 800 m. square. % g d. Large woods of clistinctivo shape -at loast 800 m. square. Caro must bo taken to . oport sudi'lendmarks w ich diffeb from the map as the result of cutting. C. .a i'QloHi xuadu ut loaaU l -k. long Jolly the crossing of two such roads., -3-B.J3. Juno 1943   f . Railways especially after snow. g. Large towns. If outstandingly largo can be distin iisbed from any others butotherwise not reliable. in. any eront very largo towns likely to be heavily defended and must therefore be avoided. Water can be very easily seen A combination of features is ranch the landmark -e.g. a large distinctive lake with a long straight road run beside it or a large clearly-shaped wood with a railway nearby. Some final point of recognition is required that is quite unmistakeabL not more than 10 k. away from the actual area in which the lights ore t displayed. As soon as the aircraft is over the final point of rooogait.. the pilot tfill turn in the direction of the field and immediately begin looking for the lights. Church-towers and other prominent buildings cannot easily bo soon and use as guides -except perhaps for direction-marks to be followed dur the final run-up. The paramount importer 'a of choosing an area which can easily be recognised at night from the air ill be understood when'it is realised that an air craft circliUfj round searching for the area will most likely arouso the neighbourhood and attract unwelcome attention tc the reception committee. RECEPTION ARRANGEMENTS. The difficulties of the Reception Committee may 'be appreciated when it is con sidered that a. The Committee may receive from four to eight or more containers each weighing 300 lbs. 130 kg. . b. The operation may take place on any one of moon-period nights not 1 of which night only being received shortly bofore the operation. Some operations may take place without a moon but in any event favourable weather rust be awaited. c. The time spent on the landing-ground after the aircraft has arriv must be reducec. to the absolute minimum necessary for the dispose the containers. d. At least fourteen days notice is required in England of on operate and longer notice is very helpful. The loader s orders for the Reception Committee should embrace the following points J. Information. Sufficient to enable the individual members to make thein perso'Hal'lSw'uiceraonts aid cover for being present but no more. 2. intention. A clear iatomont of what the loader intends to achieve -i o. to receive and dispose of so many containers and so many agents. Approach to dropping area find rendezvous. Members should preferably proceed independently or in pairs -not in a large body. Exact directions should be given to appropriate members of the Committee as to where they are to take the matorini assigned to thorn and when thoir particular port in the operation will finish. Pour men detailed individually to work the lights. A man detailed as responsible for any arms to be brought to the r Tous arming of members of the Committee for the operation and d posal of these arm. afterwords., d. Look-outs round tho area during tke operation. e. Individual members responsible fox-spotting tho parachutes as they descend and going at once to the spot. For this and all other purposes it is advisable to number the members of the Reception Com mittee and parachutes should be spotted and marked by numbers the first to reach the ground being marked by No. 1 the second to reach the ground by No. 2 and so on. Beware of saying the first parachute to leave the plane in tho cast of containers as all will appe gr to he dropped simultaneously sit ough in realaty they are dropped at fraction-of-a-socond intervals. f. Some one detailed to make sure no odds and ends have been left on the landing-ground. The total number of containers et . in the operation should be marked on each one. g. oonal guides for any new agents being dropped. New arrivals should be careful not to speak loudly as thoy will be deaf from noise of aircraft engine ' h.  Eransport arrangements. Availability or otherwise of transport govern tea great extent the method of organisation. Administration. a. Transport. Lorry or cart with circulation permit. b. Three red torches and one white torch plus spares. c. Sandbags to pack parachutes and odds and ends before burying. Any necessary holes would have been dug in advance. Consider advisa bility of two alternative burying plaaoo 1 000 nu-or more apart both prepared in the case of emergencys  i d. Spades. Snuff or pepper for scattering over places which have been walked on or where burying has token place to deter dogs. f. Gloves or cloth if containers do be transported whole as handles are thin. If during any part of the transport absolute silence is vital then a cloth or other material for muffling containers. o. 3hter-Oomniunication. a. password and/or audible challenge and reply. b. S-phone and Eureka if being used. Note These latter ere operated by trained personnel and in the case of Eureka tbe organiser must not over ride the operator s choice-of position unless vital to security. The Committee should be fully ready f i moment the agreed stand-by time arrives and for security reasons it may be a. .saila to have the Committee assemble at a rendezvous some little way from the actual area well beforehand and the agreed stand-by time only announced when all are fvwiM o-i r f-tho ronrloBvcnB Opportunity might be taken for technical InstructJon in arms etc. during time of -waiting  At least some members of tile Reception Committee must be familiar with the con tainers and their manipulation and it will probably be found advisable to appoint sub-leaders. ihe tot l number in a Reception Committee will depend both on the number of people mr' ilable and on the degree of security necessary in view of the local conditions.  o-iV men are required to every one container but it will probably not bo found  -hie or advisable to have four times the number of men as there are containers expected and groups of four will have to deal with more than one container., e  5-B.3 June 1945 It is advisable to awango f some jonsta fc observation on the security of dropping area .'feLcaso of police onquirios or careless tall both before and any operation Por this purpose seme one living in tho locality will bo nooossarye about 3-5 k apart has been  Use of two simultaneous or alternative grounds found an advantage. Dio pilot is warned - o expect lights at both grounds or only. 1 Last-minute alterations should bo avoided unless absolutely essential othc wise confusion wish consequent danger to all is bound to result. Finally London appreciate any helpful comments agents can send back about operations -oeg. details f any contents damaged by fall so that items may bo better protected in fut1 . \  %  /  /, B.5  PIGEONS  1. INTRODUCTION. Pigeons -are a valuable form of oommunieation from tb.e. fialdi to this country.  Under circumstances which may arise in the near future they may prove the only channel open to the agent.  Therefore a full understanding of how to handle feed and house them is essential.  During this course you will be given opportunities of handling and releasing the birds but before tacklipg the practical side of the work you must note carefully and learn the instructions given in this lecture in order that you can pass this information on to those who will look after them.  The pigeon is a reliable messenger provided he is properly looked after. Out of E7 birds released recently 21 returned safely. This percentage can be further increased with careful handling.  Pigeons have certain advantages and disadvantages as messengers.  . Advantages arc  a. General. Essential whore electric power is unobtainable and batteries must be preserved severe 'jamming is experienced D.F. vans are causing difficulties contact cannot be obtained by W/T.  b. Specifio. i. Long ii. Complicated iii. Photographs iv. The Disadvantages are  i. They sets. ii. They iii. They certain enemies i.e. hawks and the farmer . 2. CHARACTERISTICS a. Homing Instinct. A pigeon returns to its loft in this country because  i. It is ii. It is iii. It is days in that loft. Loss of Homing Instinct.  A pigeon should not be retained longor than fourteen days. Aftor this time it tends to lose its homing..instinct  3., ,  3 B 5  Tho rollowing food is euitablej-   Peas boans vetches lentils whoat maize oots barley rlcs  dari millet.  Quantity -2/3 egg cup egg cup 35 grammes per bird per large feed.  1/3 egg cup per bird per small feed.  Mix clean sand or salt grit i.e. broken shells with food.  Pood must be in good condition. pigeons ore more susceptible than other birds to the condition of their food. The two chief dangers are dampness and soiling by vermin. If the food exhibits any signs of fungus musty smell mould or vermin excreta it must  not be used  b Water.  Plenty of fresh clean water must always be available. A thirsty  bird will come down to drink.  6. HOUSMCI. Pigeons should not be'dcept in their cylinder for more than one day. If dropped in basket or ventilated box they can remain there for five days providing they have food and water. After five days they should be liberated daily to exercise their wings in an attic shed or cellar.  Large baskets or rabbit hutches arc suitable housing places providing  they are liberated for exercise in a larger area. R r security  reasons they should be kept where other animals are kept.  The greatest care must he taken to prevent rats cats or stoats from approaching them. Pigeons attract vermin and rats and stoats will kill for the sake of killing if either gets into the pigeon basket it will kill the lot.  The following method of housing is suggestedt-   Keep the pigeons in a basket vdiich is cleaned out daily. Liberate them daily in an attic shed or cellar. Suspend the basket by a rope or wire from a beam to about five feet from the ground. Remember a rat can jump upwards vertically 5 feet and horizontally 4 feet.  7. HEALTH. Pigeons are very susceptible to disease. Clean food regularly  administered clean water and regular exercise will assist in keeping  the birds healthy.  3h addition their basket container must be kept scrupulously clean  and they must not be overcrowded. Remember an unhealthy bird win  not be able to fly home. Nearly all diseases are caused by food  water overcrowding neglect or foul air.  Signs of disease are -   Bullying of a bird by the others. Green watery or foetid excreta. Lack of energy and vivacity. Discharge from eyes nose or mouth. External injuries.  Nearly all,  4r B 5 Brgairl.jp-all -tiisoaBos-ajro contagious and the bird oust t isolated A noma hocarb boat is about 180 ejr minuts The signs of a'healthy bird aro -  Snow white wattlo protuboranco on. the top of the beak . Teathors close against body. Bright sparkling eye.  8 MESSAGES. Messages should be written in ink typed or photographed. Messages written in pencil are difficult to read after being rolled up for a long tine. If there is more than one message they should be numbered in order. The message should bo carefully rolled and inserted in the container which is then strapped to the pigeon s leg. Youtwill have an opportunity of doing this later. 9. LIBERATIOM. Whenever possible release two birds with the same message thus sending a duplicate copy. pigeons always fly better in company and there is a greater chance of the message being received. Choose favourable weather conditions. Release the birds at .sun-risc if possible. This will enable them to get home by daylight. Release the birds clear of high trees overhead wiros and buildings. 10. CCKCLU3I0E. Although you personally may not have to look after your pigeon messengers it is of the utmost importance that you make sure they are properly handled. The success of your mission will depend on the efficiency of your communications. To sun up remember these points  i. A pigeon must have regular feeding and exercise.  ii. The food must he clean. iii. The birds must be healthy and iv. Pigeons require gentle handling. v. The birds should be liberated conditions not more than fourteen days after arrival. oOo PRACTICAL HANDLING.  The lecture is followed hy five half-hour periods of handling pigeons including message writing and attaching to container feeding and liberating the birds. oOo, i]NGMT F0RC 8  i-j 1. General The aim of these lectures is to present a clear picture of the forces which oppose the agent either openly or secretly. By this means. helascertains ' the nature of the opposition the degree of danger to be expected and will have a basis for planning measures of self-protection e 2 . Police and C.-u. .. He must therefore have a sound understanding of the German police and C.h. authorities together with any Nazi Party organisations and national police which .may be used against him. Ke must mow what kind of work they do in what way each is dangerous and ho.w he may recognise.them. 3. Armed Forces.  In addition if engaged in para-military work he will require to be able to identify opposing enemy troops and their weapons. In any case for general cover to show residence in occupied country he. mus-t have a background knowledge garticualrly of uniforms. Furthermore by being able to recognise enemy weapons and uniforms he will be enabled to send simple non technical reports on military intelmgentle ma-fters. 4. Flexibility -regional treatment. It is essential that the subject-matter and emphasis applied to it should be adapted to the student's nationality i . -. -   fa Western Occupied Countries. -France Belgium Holland Denmarx and Norway. First emphasis should be placed on German police and C.J. Services Gestapo 3.D. Abw.ehr G.F.P. and their activity in the individual country studied. National police play an important role and are worthy of separate treatment - France taken as an example. Nazi Party formations only dangerous as accessory police' and para-military services.  b German Reich with incorporated territories . -.Germany Austria Alsace-xorraine Incorporated Czechoslovakia and Poland General Gouvemollient virtually the same. A full study of the Nazi Party system is here necessary as a basis for police and C.k. individual party formations e.g. S.A. and Civil 3.3 must be known in greater detail. The German police and C.3. ar-e treated as fully as before with the inclusion of static uniformed police ochupo and Gendarmerie.  e.g.  c Pastern territories Balkans and Italy. Again first emphasis is given to German police and C.3. oervices as in a with stress on uniformed mobile formations uinsatzkomniandos . No, 2  separata troatnu-nt is given to national' police and Quisling organisations their role being briefly discussed. Such German party formations care included as work in those territories for specific reasons. 5 Armed Forces Recognition. Equal importance should be givSn to arms and equipment on the one hand and uniforms on the other. These must be explained and revised throughout pictorially and. by models. It is above all essential to distinguish the different arms of the service. Detailed organisation of units and formations should be avoided. Stress is laid on the troops likely to be met with in the country concerned. 6. Other subjects of general application.  a Intelligence Reports'. To be ready for such eventualities the agent must have explained to him what military information is likely to be of interest to the Allies based On the foregoing recognition the limitations of his work in this respect and in what manner he should write and send his message.  b German Light Weapons. Not only-the recognition but the handling of certain essential German light weapons is to be studied and revised. The agent must be able to use them and to pass on his knowledge. -oOo, C.1 &2. July 1944 GKRivIAN C0UNT1R-JSlIoNAGJ INTRODUCTION The Rnemy Forces Co Xse. The course of twelve lectures falls into two halves 1. Nnemy police and C.N0 forces E. Nnemy armed forces. Followed by two periods of revision and recognition practic relating to both. Dn jy Police and Counter-Dspionage Authorities . In occupied countries four types of organisation are of  importance. I. German C.2. Authorities who direct and take the initia tive in security work. They specialize in the invest gation of subversive activity and will normally work in secret hence usually in plain clothes. They may be civil or military. C. 1 and 2 II. German uniformed police military or civil for fhe maintenance of order. They are used for routine con trol of the civil population may carry out acts of repression and do not work clandestinely. C. 3 II. National police of the occupied country concerned either uniformed or plain clothes. This will vary in importance according to the functions and amount of authority left to it either now or in invasion conditions . C . 4 IV. Nazi or pro-Naz.1 party organisations German or indigenous These will play an auxiliary role either para-military assisting in maintaining order and in repression or C.2. acting as informers etc. against resistance groups. C. 5 In all these cases examined which bear protection 0 three main questions will be directly on the agent's self  1. What kind of work do they do 2. In what particular ways dangerous to the agent are they important or 3. How may they be recognised, C.1 &2. July 1944  2  c German C.E. Authorities. 1 Centralised Control.  i Several different authorities civil and military are occupied in C.E. and general security work. All civil authorities are under one unified command -'Security H.Q .' in Berlin R.S.H.A. Military security is separately organised under Armed Forces command but in practice is believed to be falling more and more under the domination of the above H.Q. fii The same unified direction exists in occupied countries where C.E. worx amongst the civil population is control d by a 'Security Commander'  B. d. S. . He will also control the work of the plain clothes national police. 2 . Party Domination. fi Nazi Party control is strongly in evidence especially on a high level since Party men have been appointed to all the more important posts. Owing to recent developments its presence is likely to be felt in military as well as in civil authori ties .  ii In general however German civil rather than military authorities provide the more frequent source of danger for the agent chiefly owing to this political character. A. CIVIL SECURITY POLICE 1 General Composition and Activities. fa Three authorities are concerned fi Geheime Staatspolizei fGestapo -the State Political Police. fii Kriminalpolizei fKripo -the State Criminal Police. These two make up the Sicherheitspolizei fSipo proper i.e. the Security Police of the State. fiii Sicherheitsdienst fS.D. -the Security Service of the Nazi Party. Now directly affiliated to the State Police in organisation and duties. The whole is usually known as 'Sipo and S.D.' fb In occupied territory their work does not fall into separate spheres. They form one and the same C.E. organisation fSipo -S.D. under one leadership., C.1 &2. July 1944. They therefore co-operate closuly and may actually ho combined in the saniu unit. fe.g. Hinsatz-Kommandos -described later. fc Three distinct types of .job however necessarily exist and each is dominated by one of the three authorities  fi Political investigation and executive work. This is the field of the Gestapo but many of its key members are also S .D. men. Criminal police may also assist in investigation. fii Political intelligence service. This is essentially 'the field of the 3 .D. though some information may quite well come via the other two branches. These are tho principal C.k. Services. fiii Criminal Investigation. i.e. the work of the Eripo which is not directly concerned with C.k. 2. Importance to the Agent. fa Political bias. This is the essential feature of the Sipo and S.D. i.e. the aim to preserve the Nazi Regime at all costs rather than maintain abstract standards of order and justice. In occupied territory it will however seek to destroy any activity directed against a German or Germanised system of administration military as well as civil. fb S S. domination. Its close identification with the Nazi Party is shown by the great majority of members drawn from the S .3. i.e the 'elite' of the Party. So close is this that in each occupied country as in Germany the chief of 3.S. is also the chief of the German police. All recruiting is now via the 3.3 . and recruits pass through 3.3. training schools. fc Independent authority. Its activities and powers are not subject in any way to the judicial and police system of the country even where this system is still officially in existence. Use'is made of 'S.S. and police courts' which can deal rapidly with cases of obvious subversive activity according to German police laws and expediency. fd Clandestine activities. It works behind the normal facade of uniformed police German and .foreign watching them as well as-any possible suspect. fa Civilian agents. In this respect it can make con siderable use of political pressure and blackmail. The main types will include -  Members of Nazi organisations and Nazi sympathisers. Germans or other nationals on whose relatives or, c.1 &2. -4 - July 1944o friends pressure can be exerted. Released criminals. Mercenaries working only for direct material reward and may include a minority of -  Released P.W.s or foreign workers. Released Allied agents . Jews black-marketeers and others who retain their liberty only by working as police agents. Special gangs are being' used e.g. in France for the  more unsavoury types of C.iii. work e.g. as thugs seizing suspects for the Gestapo contacts for hotels brothels etc. as well as general spying for the S.D. .They are mobile subsist largely on the proceeds of private property they have raided ana are recruited amongst the lowest social types and criminals fa large proportion of non-Germans .  f Military security. It will not in theory interfere with any. purely or primarily military matters in. occupied territory but will have liaison with the military security authorities with whom there has often been friction. In practice there are growing signs that it will interfere with and infiltrate into these. Even where there is a military administration the Sipo and S.D. is supreme in C.E. work among the civil population. 3 . Recognition.  a For all clandestine and most routine work the Sipo and S.D. will wear civilian clothes. In this case its members could only be identified by their documents. /- e.g.  i Identity disc of Gestapo. fii Sipo and S.D. identity -card fred c.- fiii S .3. membership card. these to be described fb .They may however participate ini work of a para military nature near the front or in areas of large scale resistance and there co-operate with uniformed authorities. In this case they would wear -  Field grey uniform. Peaked cap with death's head. Tunic with black collar patches plain on right  S.S. rank on left national eagle on left sleeve army rank on shoulder. Open collar with tie. Sam Browne belt. SD Black diamond patch on lower left arm bearing 'S.D.' usually denotes members of this organisation., C 1 &2. ' July 1944. 5 fc All tnombors who bolong to th j S.S. rnay wear tho black party uniform of the General 3.S.' death s head on cap black collar patches as above swastika arm-band . This is rarely worn in occupied territory. The above characteristics are common to all the Sipo . and S.D. but its three services can be considered separately from the following points of'viow  1. GkSTAP0  a C.E. W0 R K.  i It is the. authority exclusively to C.E. against subversive organisations  and influences amongst the civil population.  ii It will deal with having political significance usually after the national police sometimes German criminal or military police has made a first investigation. It will therefore work against both organisations within the country or foreign agents whose work is now bound up with them.  iii  It has executive and punish as well as to investigate. It can make immediate use of 'protective custody' or the con centration camp. Less serious cases may be de ported for forced labour in Germany.  iv  It has two main lines of action in occupied countries - Supervision of national police and civil authorities generally clandestine or otherwise' . Independent investigation work followed by punitive measures. Owing to lack'of co-operation with the former the proportion of this work is growing.  v It will have specialist staff for particular problems e.g. Communists Jews workers German or foreign movement of Germans abroad the Press or any institution with political influence e.g. the church teachers fro -masons . Frontier control is essentially a Gestapo matter and the Frontier Police Grenzpolizei is actually part of the Sipo though always in uniform see later . Outside C.E. work the Gestapo is also concerned in Germany with breaches of economic laws and anti social conduct like defeatism grumbling etc.  vi Personnel. It employs greater numbers of people than other security authorities. These are of varying quality and experience. On the one hand the organising and specialist staff which includes a high proportion of S.D. men. On the other the lower ranks whose only qualities are political reliability and lack of scruple. Members of the criminal police and even of foreign police forces have also been transferred. Women have been recruited in Germany and some work in Occupied Territory., C.1 &2 July 1944.  6  vii Methods . It makes use of all the detective methods employed by C.E. authorities in general se 'A' 1 lectures -either the more routine surveillance search black lists informant service etc. or the more subtle provocation or penetration . There are fe'w-cases of real originality in method but there is no legal restriction on its use of force. It also-makes full use of all the types of agent mentioned above.  viii H Q .s Gestapo stations are called in order of importance -.Gestapo-loitstelle Gestapo-stelle Ausson-stolle.  b IMPORTANCE TO THE AGENT Main features and dangers summarised  i Its principal motive of political hatred and patriotic resistance hence violent measures.  ii Its application of all available political and influence to C.E. work e.g. it makes use of Party organisations as a source of information it is always backed by the authority of the 3.3. it can bring pressure on people to work for it and It is independent of legal control.  iii Its exooutive powers enabling it to punish trial.  iv Its use of largo numbors of people which are an advantage in o.g. surveillance round-ups and supervision of other authorities.  v Its hold over the-imagination of the untrained civilian which has been increased by a skilful use of propaganda and 'build up' . In his e-yus it tends to give its name to all security authorities.  vi N.B. Certain limitations to its power and efficiency i.e. variable quality of its personnelmany of whom lack experience and knowledge of the country concerned its dependence on the official police as a source of information of which it will be deprived by any re fusal to co-operate on the part of the latter corruption is by no moans unknown it is not by any means exempt from the supervision of the Party 3 .D. 2. SICHliRShITSDI ENST  a W0RK  i A special and powerful section of the 3.3. whose aim is primarily to safeguard the security of the Nazi Party internally and externally but in practice also that of the State. Its work runs therefore closely parallel to that of the Gestapo. - ii It works chiefly as a political information service spying on German and foreigner Nazi and non-Nazi alike. This information can be put to great use in CJB. work and there is there fore a close liaison to the Gestapo to whom it will hand over suspects for suitable treatment., C 1 & 2 . July 1944  7 -  -fill Its mu tub ors who aro paid by tho Party and inoludo soutto of its most influential men may also bo members known or unknown of any other state authority ospuoi-ally 'the police or oven of industrial undertakings Those in tho police aro often appointed direct from tho Party with little or no police training. Some may oven belong to the armed forces. jfiv Since it can hold key positions in the Gestapo it may also wield executive authority especially in occupied countries .  v The Wehrmacht recognises its authority even in military security work. The armed forces belong so far primarily to the S.D. field of investigation though the Gestapo may be associated with it in this work.  vi It also organises political espionage countries . in neutral fvii It may employ any of the same types of agent used by the Gestapo though they will tend to be fewer and of higher grade. fviii H.Q .s S.D. stations in Germany are called in order of importance -Leitabschnitte Abschnitte Nebenstellen. In occupied countries they are likely to be combined with Gestapo stations.  b IMPORTANCE TO TED AGlilTT . Main features and dangers summarised fi A powerful political elite with controlling influence on a high level. Not numerous hut man for man more powerful than member fii of the Gestapo or other police outside the S.D. who must co-operate with them and in general fear them. fiii A dangerous information service with members generally well placed in any sphere of military or civil life dangerous to Germans and patriots alike.  methods. In  fiv Little heard of because of clandestine occupied territory it tends to hide in the shadow of the Gestapo and other police More often than not the identity of its members is unkno wn. Special danger of penetration by the S.D. of foreign as well as German official organisations'. It is willing to wait long periods for this to take effect. N.B. Its danger to other subversive organisations in neutral countrias  v  Its presence may be suspected amongst any Gestapo personnel doing important investigations. In this case it will wield at least equal authority and do exactly the same job.  vi Likely to be used for more delicate and h gh-level investigations e.g. any possible opposition within the army or the Party. 3. KRIMINAL PO LIZLI  6 W OR K. The investigation and detection o f ordinary civil crime, C 1 &2 July 1944. 8 not of a political nature i.e. not directly interested in resistance work.  b IMPORTANCE TO THi4 AGliNT.  i No C.E. work of its own initiative not believed to be sent to occupied countries in large numbers but fii It may investigate a crime whose nature is not political at first sight. Moreover it will assist in the pursuit of all missing persons whether wanted for political reasons or not. fiii It may be required to assist the security authorities in an investigation because of its technical experience or in supervising controls. Many of its former personnel have in any case been drafted into the Gestapo. B. MILITARY SECURITY AUTHORITIES 1. ABWEHR -German Intelligence Service fa Character and Activities.  i General. The Abwshr is the official directing authority in all intelligence matters affecting the Wehrmacht i.e. offensive espionage and sabotage as well as C.E. fii Command. It is an inter-service organisation working under the High Command OJI.W. but in practice its work especially in C.E. is believed to be falling more and more under the control of the H.Q. of Sipo andS.D. in Berlin R.S.H.A. fiii Scope. It is a world-wide organisation. In peace time it can be assumed to have had representatives in all countries according to strategic importance. Its C.E. staff have been and still are mainly concentratod in German occupied countries but its channels of information on this subject will extend to neutral and may extend to Allied countries. fiv Personnel. In German-occupied country its staff is composed of officers of the armed forces -any of the three services. Relatively small in numbers they include experienced and able men including technical staff most of whom date from peace time but personnel recruited in war time is often not of the same quality. Officers do not hold very high rank but have an authority extending beyond their rank. They include Sonderfuhrer or civilians commissioned for special qualifications . In neutral countries its staff has of course innocent cover generally diplomatic or commercial the latter is probably the more effective as the former has been much abused. Either cover may be supplied by other Axis or satellite powers.  v Political Tendencies. The original Abwehr personnel was not concerned with political matters and owed no,  Vi   vii  viii fix   x  h C E.  i  ii  ill  C.1&2. July 1944.   9  particular allegiance to the Nazi Party. Many of this staff remain who are therefore very different in spirit from the Sipo and S.D. There has been infiltration of personnel from the latter however and replacements on a high level. This means greater Party especially S S control.  Civilian agents are used in fairly large numbers and  are of varying quality. In this case there is  rarely question of political enthusiasm or pressure.  They normally work for material gain. Further they  are under the complete control of the individual  officer who recruits and operates them.  They range from higher diplo.matio and social circles probably penetrated before the war to low grade types without much training who are expected to collect an indiscriminate array of information.  Efficiency. Sharing in the initial success of the  German armies its prestige seems to have suffered  greatly in the later course of the war. Errors in  its intelligence loose organisation allowing too  much individual licence and failure to sift the  information received were weaknesses resulting in  an enquiry late '43 . The resulting purge and the  encroachments of the Sipo and S.D. will probably  have spurred it .to greater efficiency.  Static H.Q.s  In occupied countries the Abwehr stations are called  in order of importance -Abwehrstelle Nebenstelle Auss enstelle .  In neutral countries the clandestine set-up is known as Eriegs-organisation' and generally centres around members of the legation staff.  Mobile organisation in areas of military operations  ' likely to be now in use in the West  The above stations are replaced by Abwehr-gruppen Abwehr-kommandos or Abwehr-trupps which follow the  main H.Q.s of military formations. They have cover names and their own W/T and motor transport.  In each case three main sections organise .-espionage  sabotage both material and moral . C.E.  Work. '  General. Protection of the aimed forces in occupied  country -their personnel material and working against all kinds of subversive activity. Though in certain countries it has carried out C.E. work in protection of civil targets it is now expected  to be restricted to military security.  Control of armed forces security. Via the military commanders it will provide security directives for military intelligence officers and will thereby direct the work of the military security police   G.F.P. with whom it co-operates closely. Abwehr officers are normally attached to these intelligence officers down to Corps H.Q . and there is also liaison between local Abwehr and Divisional H.Q. .  Independent investigations amongst troops or civilians  concerning e.g. detection of enemy agents serious breaches of security treachery desertion or, C.1 &2. July 1944. 1 .-10 'defeatism carelessness on the part of Wehrmacht or civilians political agitation and propaganda against troops. It may also have a representative in Gestapo enquiries since the interests of the two may overlap fiv Specialist personnel in occupied countries are employed in g Censorship of mail telephone and publications. W/T security involving close relations with the Army D/F-ing service Funk Abwehr' or WNV Funk III for detection of illegal transmitters. Though not strictly an Abwehr department and employing various military and police personnel this service needs to be in constant touch with the Abwehr for obtaining information and passing on its results.  The Sipo and S.D. is interfering now in both these spheres.  o Offensive Intelligence.  i Mobile Abwehr units operate in the theatre of hostilities in the two offensive sections this will apply particularly to a retreat in the West - I. Operational intelligence collected by visual recce interrogation telephone interception seizing documents using spies and traitors. II. Sabotage guerilla warfare and subversion i.e. demoralisation rumour spreading etc. Personnel of the 'Brandenburg Division' are specially trained to carry out such para-military jobs in civilian clothes or in German uniform. fii Static Abwehr H.Q s employ agents anywhere inside or outside occupied territory to carry out tine same duties. fiii rR Organisation' prepared .for areas from which. German forces may have to retreat. Individual agents stay . behind to carry out any of the above offensive duties and communicate by W/T with Abwehr posts behind the German lines.  d Importance to the Agent.  Main features and dangers summarised.    i The main armed forces authority directing measures against subversive activity. Supplies directives and undertakes important investigations.  fji Like the S.D. t nds to remain more inconspicuo us than e.g. the Gestapo working principally as an information and investigation service. fiii Danger of penetration dating far back and of long standing informat ion service.  f iv Extent of its authority over civilians in C.E. matters generally limited to what is necessary for protecting military targets and conducting investigations. Makes as much use as possible of G.F.P. Will however hand over suspects to Military Courts Martial'and noW some times to Gestapo.  v Liaison therefore to be expected - With military security police fG.F.P. its chief instrument in security work fin Germany the latter work is done by the Gestapo ., C. 1 &2. July 1944. 11 -  With Sipo and S D since their work is often closely connected. Liaison has often been bad owing to jealousy and difference in outlook. fe Recogni tion. There is no means of recognition by uniform. Officers may wear plain clothes where necessary but will otherwise wear the uniform of the branch of the armed forces to which they belong. They usually travel with Civil Service cover. Their papers offer the only material evidence for identifying them. 2. GEHEIME FBLDPOLIZEI G.T.P. -Military Security Poliee .  a C.'E. Work. fi Army or Air Force personnel trained in C.E. Their work is to protect security of military targets  personnel or material against subversive activity i.e. to'see that the C.E. directives of the Abwehr are carried out. No offensive intelligence work.  ii They act as an exeoutive intelligence officer at the Army H.Q. to which they are attached. They may also be attached to a Kommandantur or local H.Q . of military administration.  iii They do investigations security preliminary enquiries of their own initiative afterwards under higher authority Abwehr or otherwise .  iv They do not carry but will supervise the work of the Feldgendarmer ie  uniformed military police. and will receive any reports on suspects from them. Close .liaison between the two.  v They are most often ex-members of the German criminal police. Therefore a moderately good standard of intelligence and experience.  vi They may carry out investigations into civi 1 C.E. matters' but if so are most likely to be under the direction of the Sipo and S.D. They may in any case include S.S. men or even Sipo and S.D. personnel.  vii Distribution. Sections abbut 35 men attached to each Army or L of C H.Q. Sections varying strength in important towns. Small detached units under mmaudanturs harbour  masters etc .  b Importance to the Agent. Main features and dangers summarised   i Investigation after subversive activity against a military target. Quite capable in this but initiative in any important matter will come from Abwehr or Sipo and S.D.  ii Supervise routine security work of Feldgendarmerie and where there is military administration national civil police. Receive reports on suspects from both., C.1 &20 July 1944. -12  flii Powers are quite considerable -Command where needed over any Army O.R.s. Access to any military establishment or means'of communication. Provisional arrest of soldiers or civilians. fiv Liaison with -Feldgendarmer ie . Gestapo often work under Sipo -S.D. dir ection.  v Some olandestine work and use of informers along with routine supervision and investigation work. r  vi Numbers relatively small but generally have police experience.  c Recognition.  i Civilian clothes are worn where necessary. In t.his case identity papers are the only help. Main identity card light blue.  ii Where uniform is worn - Normal army uniform with colour of arm dark green  as for Wehrmacht official and secondary colour light blue on epaulettes . .The letters G.P.P. may also be worn on epaulettes ., C. 3. July 44.  GERMAN ' JMFORMED POLICE.  Introduction.  This type of authority is less dangerous to the agent in that it does not work clandestinely hut it plays an important part in routine controls or the suppression of open resistance. With invasion and with decreasing German confidence in the national police it may he reinforced in Western Europe.  A - M IL I TARY.  EELD GE H DAR MER I E  a. General. i. Its main purpose is the enforcement amongst German soldiers traffic control and the normal work done by any military police In these duties it is further reinforced by the Army Patrol Service Heeresstreifendienst. ii. It has however considerable in areas under German military administration e.g Belgium and nearly all France . Many of its personnel are attached to Kommandanturs as well as to H.Q. s of military formations. iii. They are mainly recruited from or else transferred from infantry. The standard of intelligence is not normally high. All are at least N.C.O.s and trained soldiers. b. Security Work. i. Routine controls fixed or population. ii. In special cases rounding-under direction of military security police G.F.P. . ill. Supervision of local civil police especially where there is' military administration.  c. Importancc to Agent. i. Routine work can be efficient within limits  . ii. So far most local controls left to the national police. With invasion increase of military duties will prevent increased supervision.of these by F.G. iii. Much official authority over to use it but its exercise similarly limited. iv. Often handicapped by lack language and documents. v. Always armed with pistols weapons physically tough. vi. Take no initiative in investigating but report them to security authorities. Ho secret to rk and no special C.E. training., C. 3 July 44.  d. Uniform. Normal army uniform with i. Police badge eagle leaves on upper left arm. . ii. Narrow brown arm- Feldgendarmerie1 on it. iii. When on dtity ere chain around the neck with eagle and 1FeldgendarmerieT on it. B - CIVIL.  1. General. a. German uniformed civil police have not yet been sent to Western occupied countries in very large numbers on account of the extensive use of national police for-ces.-Pheir numbers may be increased. b. It is semi-military in its training and in many of its activities. Many of its personnel are ex-soldiers c. It is not so completely a Nazi creation as the civil security police but its training and organisation have been modified and brought into line with Nazi principles. Especially among the younger personnel will be found many Nazis and as many as possible of its officers are drawn from the S.S. officer schools. d. Its personnel has been increased  including from fighting at the front to A.R.P. in order to make it an efficient instrument of the regime. Like the security police all are at the disposal of the S.g. and Police Leader of the area. 2. Only one individual type is of great importance KASERN1ERTE P0LLZE1 POLLOB BA'll1ALLONS1  a. Work. i. Fully armed mobile disorder'amongst civilian population in any particular area i.e. where special reinforcement is needed for local authorities.  ii Assis ting in keeping against sabotage or guerrilla activity.  iii. In special cases searches for arms etc. under direction of security police. iv. Acts of repression forced labour and executions. b. Importance to Agent. i. To be reckoned with ii. Very well armed where necessary light artillery and A.F.V.s. iii. Very mobile almost, C 3. July 44.  It. Generally tough physically may he young or middle aged no particular intelligence hut political and police training as well as military.  y. Do not work individually hut as. fairly large unit up te. battalion strength c. 500 to 600 lien organised generally as infantry battalion. vi. Not normally used for routine control work but only where there is particular trouble. No secret work but may he under orders of security police. May sometimes settle down to a static role for the time being -guard duties and some control work. e.g. Holland. vii. Not yet very numerous in Western Europe hut are present and have been used against the 'Maquis Likely to he reinforced with open hostilities. So far have played most important role in Eastern Europe.  Often called 1Gnine Polizei' -green police -or 'Schupo1 because of similar uniform linked to the latter in organisation.  c. Uniform. Green. Tunic military style closed collar . Dark brown collar and cuffs in some cases a plain tunic  is being worn. -' Police.badge on upper left arm May have band with name of unit on lower left arm and regimental number on shoulder strap.  F.S. cap or steel helmet both with police badge. Slacks and jack-boots or riding-breeches and boots. 3 POLICE OPERATIONAL GPiOUPS. Sinsatzgruppen and Einsatzkommandos  a. General. i. Composite personnel working together against large-scale and mainly open resistance by civil population i.e chiefly partisans ii. Under 'S.S. in direct touch with 'Security H.Q.' in Berlin. iii. Work in close but ..are not under military commander except for full military operations or for administration iv. Einsatzgruppen Einsatzkommandos 80 to 100 men and further into Teilkommandos which may be up with the most forward regular troops b. Security Work. i. Operations normally directed by Sipo and SiD. who will also organise any clandestine work e.g. an informant service and contacting of local quislings ii. Routine work round-ups guard duties punitive measures like executions and burning villages and actual fighting done by Police Battalion personnel, C 5 4  July 44..  Walfen S.S. and native or foreign quisling troops  iii. All generally work in uniform even security police. iv. Usually molile may even settle down and become static police for the area. c. Importance to Agent. i. When faced types of civil police S.S and even military personnel will work together as one whole. ii. Considerable and may be reinforced by army units. iii. So far similar combinations have been used against Maquis1 of Western Europe. These contain at present a con siderable proportion of national police but it likely that the proportion of German and quisling personnel will increase. iv. Well equipped communication. Nearly all units motorised. Armed with rifles machine pistols M.G.s and heavy weapons according to operations. One w/T set normally to each Kommando. d Uniform.  According to their own service. S.D'. sign on lower left arm seems to be worn in some units by other.as well as  S.D. personnel. 4. FRONTIER AND COASTAL CONTROL. a. General. Two elements make up the organisation supervising frontiers i. The 1GrenzpolizciT frontier police -a section of the security police Sipo and S-.D. under direct supervision of the Gestapo. ii. The T Zollgrenzschutzr or customs officials from whom.a special service has been formed especially for occupied countries called TV.G.A.D.T reinforced frontier control service . This service also does security work. b. Grenzpolizei. i. Work. Fixed posts sometimes individuals at impbrtant points on the frontier' also mobile patrols. Control all routine security work and can make in vestigations. All have Sipo' and S.S training and are controlled from local Gestapo H.Q . May be assisted by not only V.G.A.D. but other uniformed police and even troops. Dangerous -for the same reasons as other Sipo and S.D but generally in uniform ii. Uniform. As for TSipo and S.D ' -generally field grey ' sometimes black S.S. uniform. Usually.an arm band with T GrenzD0.1izei1 on lower left arm., c g.  5 July 44  c Y.G A.D and Customs Service  1 Work. Economic controls always tut also used for routine security work on frontier.and coast especially where no 1Gfenzpolizei' on the spot. Stations known as Gast1. Routine controls efficient. Close liaison with Grenzpolizei and therefore with-Gestapo.  ii. Uniform. Field seen especially on coast and rivers. Acanthis leaf on cap and collar patches. Arm-hand with national eagle on lower left arm. 5. - RAILWAY COFIROL. a. General. Two main authorities eoncerned i. The 1Eisenhahnpolizei1 Railway Police --not civil police proper hut railway officials under Ministry of Transport. ii. Members of 'Sipo and S.D.T on special railway control duty may he known as 1Balmschutz1. ill. Several other types of personnel can he called upon.  Railway Police.  i. Vtfork. Routine supervision of railway installations. Rarely control civilians M.B. however that many German railway officials have been sent to Western Europe and may he used to assist in control work at important points. ii. Uniform. Tunic dark blue open collar national eagle on lef'b sleeve black trousers peaked cap. All' as for Rcichsbahn official. c. Other Authorities. i. Individuals from Sipo and S.D. usually Gestapo may supervise and assist in important controls. Wear field grey or black uniform often with arm band -TBahnschutz on lower left arm or civilian clothes ii Rational police are very generally used especially for supervising civilian guards on railway track  iii. Special units controlling German troops travelling- iv. German troops direction. 6. The following other types of German uniformed civil police may bo met with in snail numbers in'occupied countries. In all cases their importance is limited. a. Schupo Schutzpolizei -German Town Police. i. Work. Usual routine work in keeping order and dire-cting traffic. May be sent to occupied territory mainly to reinforce local police. ii. Uniform. As police .'hns.-green dark brown collar and cuffs police badge. In Germany wear a shako with large, C 3.  6 July 44.  police ladge lut not in occupied countries. May retain none of German police district on left arm alove police badge   b Wasserschupo Waterway Police.  i. Work. Routine supervision of traffic and install ations on rivers canals and in ports ii. Uniform. Dark blue tunic and trousers double breasted naval style police badge on peaked or F.S. cap and left sleeve -in yellow piping on shoulder straps and cuffs in yellow. c Marine-Ruston-Polizei MKP Coastal Police.  Same type of work on coasts and in harbours. Mainly recruited from Wasserschupo often helped by marines. Uniform same as former.  d Feuersclmpo -Fire Police.  Mobile fire service some of v\fhich works in Western  Europe.  Uniform green with police.badge black collar and  cuffs black stool helmet carmine red pipings.  e. Hllfspolizei -Reserve Police. Special constables of Gorman towns some of whom en rolled fo3 full time service outside Germany so far used only in Eastern Europe and Balkans Replaced inside Germany by Landwacht and Stadtwacht Usually only wear arm band at home abroad old blue Sehupo uniforms.  f fono Pcohnische Uothilfe -Pcciinichl Emergency Service.  i. Work. Technicians who repair essential public 'services and utilities after enemy action and do other-skilled A.R.P. jobs. Uo security work but are a section of civil police and work in oecupie k territory. Contain foreign volunteers.  ii. Uniform. Field-grey may be dark blue in Germany cog wheel on left collar patch national eagle not police badge on left arm. Arm band .with Technische Uothilfe1 on left cuff.  Use of German Troops for Security Duties.  Regular troops not under police command also carry out guard and patrol duties in rear areas i.e routine security work generally on L. of C. They .are mostly lowcategory troops and include quisling conscripts and volunteers. They are designated as  Sicherungs-regimente -down-graded-infantry units. Mostly German. Wachbataillonexi -guard-units generally good troops mostly German.  Landosschutzen-units -older men home defence troops who may bo sent to occupied territory for L of C. work. Mostly German.  Sehutzmannschaften -Mostly foreign volunteers and con scripts from Eastern Europe. Some -sent to the West  --0O0-, C. 4 July 44  NATIONAL POLICE  FRAEC E.  A POLICE UNDER GERMAN AND VICHY DOHIEATIOE.  1. General. a. System has Leen allowed to continue in all its main lines since German occupation owing to lack of German personnel and expected collaboration. t . German policy has been to  i. leave maintenance ii. exercise strict control iii. intervene directly c. Vichy authorities have themselves changes on Fascist lines in police organisation and personnel. 2. Measures jof German and Vichy Control. a. German military administration has in North Zone always ancT'of late in most of South Zone issued regulations for civilians and orders to local French police via its local H.ft s Eommandanturs . Aims to protect German troops and materials and ensure supplies from French sources.  k German Civil Police especially 3ipo and S.D. dominate French services' either openly or clandestinely. This is particularly so in C.E work.  c. Vichy authorities have administrative control over all French police. Reorganisation since 1941 -all civil police and gendarmerie now under centralised state control. Real power now in hands of Demand Secretary-General for Maintenance of Order. In each region on Intendant de Police represents central authority  d. Appointment of individual collaborators especially in higher ranks. e. Recruiting and training of new personnel on Fascist lines especially in new polios aahooTsJ mostl r from younger men. f. Clandestine supervision by Vichy representatives German security police 'anH oTEer agents. g. Use of pro-Nazi organisations to counter anti-Nazi tendencies of police KTice powers granted especially to Milice Nationals leader also Darnand 3 .Attitude of the Police.  a. Great majority has remained loyal or attitude has hardened in our favour. Help to resistance by rac. jority danger from minority. Their difficulties see above should be realised., C. 4 9  July 44.   System increasingly inefficient because majority out of sympathy with own Government. Also -poor quality of recruits jealousy of nevt formations corruption owing to low pay.  e. Timformed police.  . POLICE DF S5CURITE PUBLI&UE  a. Work and Charaeter. Local town police in communes down to 5 000 inhabitants. Preserves order directs traffic and does routine con trols. Moat affected by centralisation old 'police   municipale' now almost.all called 'police d'etat'.  Garde champetre still works in country districts. b. Importance to Agent. Majority are patriotic especially lower ranks. Where illdisposed can be dangerous because of local knowledge   e.g. documents . Help given limited by German and Vichy activities mentioned. Collaborators stroage-st at J&a-tional and Regional H.Q .'s. All armed and include mebile cyclist patrols. c Uniform.  Officers -Black perked cap often riding breeches.  O.R.s -Dark blue Kepi generally slacks mobile' patrols -riding breeches Badge for all -I1 Francisque double headed axe' and  faisceaux with laurel wreath .  2. C-EKDARMERIE. a W°rfc iLniL Character.  Same work in similar communes and countryside especially control.of movement. Semi-military body recruited mainly from army personnel now only used as a civil police  ImportSince to Agent.  Strongly patriotic -in very direct touch with the people. Very few collaborators. Active help for resistance. Also controlled and watched but this is more difficult in countryside. Mistrusted by Germans and unlikely to be given important role. Many arc already in the Maquis.  o.'Uniform. ...  Black tunic dark blue slacks great-coat blue or khaki Kepi rarely helmet silver galons of rank and grenades on collar  3. GARDE MOBILEo a. Work and Oharr.oter. Mobile controls using motor transport. More heavily armed than Gendarmerie some automatic weapons a similar semi-military body. Intended for suppression of special disorder.  I, 0 4. 3  July 44  b. Importance to Agent. In the past dangerous and pro-Vichy hut rarely pro-   German. Of late greatly improved. They can still he  dangerous because mobile and quite well armed but  diminished in importance. Used against Maquis.  c. Uniform.   Khaki on duty dark blue off duty. Usually helmet some times kepi with narrow red band great coat generally black with red lining. Galons of rank and grenades on collar in.gold.  4 TROUPES MOBILES PS RESERVE G.M.R.  a. Work and Character. Similar mobile control work but more motor transport and  better armed A mobile reserve for really serious dis  orders A Vichy creation containing more collaborators  and careerists than rest of police.  b. Importance to Agent. - More dangerous because stronger pro-Vichy element and some collaborators well armed and mobile. However growing  proportion anti-hazi and attitude improving hot very  numerous hot expected to offer serious resistance.  c. Uniform. Officers -black with peaked cap.  O.R.'o -dark b4.ue with beret or kepi.  All -riding breeches and boots and franeisque on head gear. Special badge -lion s head on upper left arm  5. MILICE HATIOhALB a. Work and Character A pro-Vichy militia formerly S.O.L. originally non political soon became an instrument of repression and collaboration under Fascist leadership Darnand supported by militias .of pro-hazi political parties Doriot Beat etc .  Recognised by the state -and now granted full police powers over civilian population may even be senior to civil police and Gendarmerie. More highly paid than these A minority has political Ideals mostly self-seekers and criminal types.  Uniformed section -the Francs Gardes -responsible for routine controls and repressive measures mobile and quite well armed including automatic weapons . Plain clothes members may work clandestinely against patriots.  b. Jmportance to Agent. Powerful as uniformed police forces. Controls and re pressive measures violent and need no police sanction. Used against maquis. hot very good fighting material  ofton hoo1igans., Collaborationist built ui to counter patriotism in rest of police may even in part replace them now working all over France no great concentration in any district.  Plain clothes members equally dangerous--informant  service working for Gestapo.  c. Uniform. Dark blue blouse with trousers buttoned at ankles. Sam Browne belt. Short boots beret or bare-headed. Badge -Greek Gamma on left breast and beret.  d. GARDES DE COIvarUNlCATIObS. and Railway Control Organisation a. Work and Character. Guard duties now limited to railway track and installations Largely supervision of conscripted civilian guards each of latter will supervise 100 m. -500 m. of track while  G.C. do patrols. G.C. usually middle-aged ex soldiers armed with pistols. Civilian guards may be aged 18 -65 armed only with a stick and work much against their will. b. Importance to Agent. Concern only railway operations. Not a serious menace.  G.C. ill paid and not very active. Civilians work only by compulsion frequent defaulters either may be ill disposed because of German reprisals and cannot put up much resistance. Some supervision by German uniformed police and railways.on.. c. Uniform. G.C. --Black with peaked cap and slacks Sam Browne.  Cr.V.C. on collar. Believed G.V.C.'1 on cap and green piping on collar. Civilian guards -only blue and white arm bands. 7. Other Formations. Playing an auxiliary role e.g  i. Gendarmerie Maritime ii. Garde du Mareclial iii. Militia of political R.N.P. Beat Francistes etc. iv. Non-party organisations Legion des Combattants Legion Volontaire Francaise  anti-Bolshevist Premier Regiment de France  military force under Vichy orders French members of German Nazi Organisations -Waffen S.S. H.S.K.K. C. PLAIN-CLOTHES POLICE including C.E. authorities . 1. POLICE DE STJRETE. a. Work and Character. Plain-clothes detective forces for investigating crime, C 4 5  July 44  political and otherwise also called Police Judieiaire under direct state control at national and regional levels  Degree of specialisation differs according to regional or urban level. Separately organised Brigade de Surete for region. In towns Surete personnel form one organisation with uniformed police though a separate section in larger towns.  Sections of Brigade show four essential types of work  i Oriminelle -ordinary civil crime.  i 3- Politique -C.E. work against political movements wTth'in uhe country cf. former B.M.A. .  iii. Surveillance du Territoire -C.E. work against forei'gn agents. IrormerTyr a separate organisation with extensive C.E. and control work including D.F.-ing. low limited to questions of parachutage . These three work closely together generally under section ii as almost all activity now has political aim  iv. Economique -control of .prices and black market. Specialist personnel needed in larger towns for dealingwith Juifs Strangers Moeurs C-arnis etc -   10 Impo taace to Agent.  Still do majority of preliminary investigations including C.E Dangerous in minority of cases often for internal political regions.  Patriotic majority.as in uniformed police can render even more valuable service to resistance e.g. concealing information from 'Germans warning of impending arrest constructing plausible defence. Closely watched and sometimes penetrated therefore consideration for their security must be shown by patriots. So mistrusted by Germans that important C.E. work'likely to' be taken more and more out of their hands.   Oihsr Plain-Clothes Police  a. Police des Renseignements Generaux Collects information on internal political social and economic affairs including morale. Therefore a source of intelligence on C.E. matters especially political.  Other Special Branches at Central H.Q  Mainly information services for special questions - police Juive Police Anti-Cornmuniste Police des Socletes Secretes i.e. freemasons etc. Action taken only by Surete.  3. Members of pro-Nazi Organisations. Eon-uniformed personnel especially of Milice P.P.F. and  L.V.F. Work mainly as informers -also provocation and, C 4 6  July 44  penetration -and rather with Gestapo than French Police. May continue to work as agents after German retreat.  B. CONCLUSION. Police Authorities in Invasion Conditions.  1. Instructions from Darnand to give full assistance to Germans e.g. to round up para-military groups and saboteurs 2. In uniformed police Nazis rely on Maintien de I Ordre under Darnand i.e. mobile services--Milice G.M.R. and Gardes Mobiles these to accompany retreating Germans. Static services of.police and gendarmerie to stay put. 3. Milice the only French authority likely to be granted much power by Germans. Members of other Nazi organisations German and French likely to be armed. 4. German uniformed authoriti.es likely to be strengthened where possible especially police battalions and Waffen S.S also military police and L of C troops. No great re inforcement yet and it will be limited by increase of purely military duties. 5. Chief security authority - Sipo and S.D U with'unlimited powers e.g.' summary court -Schnellgericht will control all French authorities supported by G.F.P. amongst military personnel and pro-Nazi organisations and agents amongst civilians. Operational groups of security and uniformed police.may deal with most serious situations 6. Amongst French police large anti-Nazi majority will give as little assistance as possible to forces of repression. Some will escape to join resistance. For those who'remain active help difficult danger of internment or at any rate disarming but shortage of German personnel seems likely to prevent this. Co-operation with Germans will at any rate get less and less. 7. In face of invasion not expected that any French authorities will present great obstacle nor that Germans can cope with internal situation alone. Danger of French elements still however both behind German lines and as .possible agents left behind in retreat.  ' oOo, C. 5. July 44 HIE HAZI PARTY ARD ITS ORGARISATIORS IN  OCCUPIED TERRITORY.  Introduction.  Three aspects of this subject interest the agent -   A The Nazi Party system in Germany which has dominated individual Germans'he may meet represents a model for collaborationist parties and has played its part in C.E. work and building up para-military formations.  B German Party Formations seen in occupied countries especially t'h e 'S. S which dominates the German security pb'li'c'e. Other organisations have little C.E. importance are mainly military or para-military in character and will be armed.  C Foreign Kazi Organisations which differ in strength and role according 't'o the country.' ' They are a danger as para military forces as auxiliary police and as C.E. agents.  MZI PARTY SYSTEM IR GERMANY brief survey  1. The Party itself E.5.D.A.P. i.e. political organisation. a. Work and Character. i. Members. ' A minority adherents pre 1933 or younger members from the Hitler Youth about 15 to 20 usually join . Miscellaneous party duties include propaganda work and supply of information. '/  ii Leaders. A system covering all German territory. This is divided into areas great and small each of which has its leader. These apart from the Reichsleitung1 or general staff range from the Gauleiter to the Bloclcwalter and often occupy high state offices.  iii. Germans abroad controlled organisation'1 A.O. which aims to reproduce in each country the Party organisation of Germany. Also controls German seamen. b. Lnportance to Agent. i. Represents the kind occupied countries have tried to introduce with in complete results. ii. Shows how political has been regimented. iii. Has become the instrument control in both Germany and occupied territory. Note especially Co-operation on higher levels between Party leaders and police leaders who are in any case party men.  Whole Party acts as information service for internal and external security members may inform on relatives and acquaintances. Regular reports originate, C. 5. 8 July 44.  from. Blockwalters and all information co-ordinated ly Party Sichorheitsdienst S.D. This system plays its part in occupied territory. In foreign countries the  A.O. has acted as an informant service -and general fifth column. 2. The Party Formations. a. Work and Importance. i. Para-military bodies organised purposes and now in many cases harnessed to vital tasks especially military in the war effort. ii. Provide disciplined and organised members but all sympathisers of the party including many who join out of self-interest. iii. Help to ensure political supremacy propaganda value of their activities and by providing a striking force to crush opposition. iv. By providing military training and discipline prepare young Germans for service in the armed forces. v. Form para-military units which do aukiliary military or armed police work. b Uniform. Civil Party formations all have swastika aim-band brown shirt tunic with open collar and tie. and usually Sam Browne.  c. Individual Formations. The moot important are i. Hitlor Youth. Age 10 to l&g or 17. Compulsory. Purposes -Physical training discipline ideological training preparation for military service often technical various A.R.P. and civil defence jobs ii. Labour Service. Age 17 to 18. Generally six months. Compulsory national service before armed forces very few escape. Purposes -Physical development discipline some military training useful source of labour and constructional work. Then follows service in the armed forces. Of those remaining in  civilian life many join the following formations again often out cf self interest  iii. S.A. Sturm Abteilung . Parr-time militia. Of little military importance home defence role organised in  Wehrmannschaften . Fairly important political role morale strengthening and party discipline. Has lost much of its power. Recognised by brown uniform with  Kepi. Not in Western occupied Europe iv. N.S.K.K. N.S. Kraftfahrer-Korps . Motor transport either part-time or professional. In the latter case it may work outside Germany. See later. v Guaeral S.S. Allgemeine S S. . By far the most powerful civilian organ saTxon. Generally occupying other positions of power and influence especially in the police. Detail later.  In the armed forces this is parallelled by a similar formation, C. 5. 3 July 44.  vi Armed S.S Yfaffon S.S. A separate 'branch of the armed forces working with the army in the field. Recruited from Party sources and subject to its political training raid influence. iTfmbers increased by foreign recruitment. Detail later  2 Organisations Affiliated to the Party.  Rot of military but indirectly of political importance.  Main purpose is the party control of civilian man-power.  . More independent in organisation than the previous formations and with their own finances. But party members occupy leading posts.  . Rote especially  labour Front. D.A.F. largest and most important of these. Controls all industrial and agricultural workers. Also reception and disposal of foreign workers.  Other professional associations -for doctors lawyers etc.  Also auxiliary associations -for women war-wounded etc.  Membership of these is not compulsory but almost essential in order to obtain a job. This means acceptance of. severe discipline and Party authority in conditions of work.  GBRMAH PARTY FORMATIORS 'SS R IR OCCUPIED C0UR1RIES.  1. General S.S. Civil . a. Work and Character. An elite in the Party. Chosen for political reliability racial purity and-physical qualities Most members of security police and many other state officials are reefuited from it. 8.D. is itself an arm of the S.S. S.S. a.nd police have same leadership. Penetration and control of almost all other official organisations b. Importance. Greatest political enemy to patriots amongst German civil personnel especially police and may have important C.E. jobs. See civil security police.1 S.S. Party ainiform -Black peaked cap with death s head black' cblla'r patches -.right plain left S.S. rankexcept in highest ranks S.S. rank both sides ridingbreeches and boots. 2. Waffen S.S. Military .. a. Work and Character. Separate military formations working ope'ra't'ionalTy 'wi'tli the array equal in status with the other three services Form entire divisions which may be under other army' formations. Strength July 1944 18 divisions about 11 all German the rest mixed or mostly foreign C-erman Personnc1. Still an elite politically and physically TcTuBToers quite carefully chosen if standard has fallen so mewfhat in the course of the war. Ro compulsion but much publicity and Party pressure also part release from labour service.-Many from Hitler Youth. Have had much experience of hard fighting at tho front., C. 5. 4 July 44. Foreign pox-sonncl. A growing-proportion. 'Quality generally far interior to the German S.S. Greatest numherG from Eastern Europe especially Russion peoples  anti-Soviet tut detachments from all satellite and western occupied countries. Usually no question of pro-Nazi enthusiasm. Some compulsion. m  b. Importance.  i. German S.S divisions stronger in numbeis than normal army divisions and have most modern weapons and equipment. Nearly all either armoured pr motorised.  ii. German personnel have all received political training. Are under strong party influence and difficult to demoralise. Normally arrogant consider themselves as an elite and. enjoy certain privileges. Therefore  evidence of jealousy between Wallen S.S. and rest of Wehrmaoht though noi real disruption as yet.  iii. So far Waffen S.S. has played a purely military but destined in case of need for that of armed police to suppress internal disorder in Germany or occupied cauntries i.e. co-operating with.Gorman police forces father than -Wehrmacht unified S.S. and police command. iv. Foreign S.S. not as great a danger military or political. Importance ..of their propaganda value to the Germans and as a useful addition in numbers. Most of units are infantry. As armed police display no sympathy for the civilian population. c. Uniform. Field grey and as for army except Death's head on hat. 5.5. collar'patches right S.S. sign left 5.5 rank but army rank also worn. National eagle on left upper arm.' Usually name of division'or regiment on band round left lower arm. Foreigners wear name of 'country' and generally national emblem usually on right arm e.g French tricolor and 'France'. Russians -shield with P.O.A. on it.  . Wide range of foreign troops seen in Western occupied Europe includes. Russian Flemish Walloon Alsatian Italian Dutch Hungarian Ukrainian and Galician units. Those not in S.S. wear ordinary Gorman uniform with minor variations.   ..'f '1j 3. N.S.K.K. a. Work and Character. Driving and maintenance of motor transport. . Works' for -either military or civil authorities chiefly transporting supplies. May patrol roads and look after their security. Include many foreigners as well as Germans. Much military training and under Wehrmaoht discipline i.-'. b. Importance. i. Germans in it will be armed and may do routine security work on roads. ii. Foreigners contain only minority of Nazis many have joined merely to avoid work in Germany. May be helpful., C 5 -5 - July 44. c. Uniform. Black B.S. cap with 1J.S.K.K. badge dark brov/ja' tunic ilaclc breeche3 aM boots In occupied countries may wear field grey. 4. Labour Service R.A D. a. Work. Labour battalions age 17 to 18 sent to occupied territory to do heavy physical vjork -on roads forti fications airfields army camps etc. on behalf of Wehrmacht. 'l3 IiLPOPtaace. Will probably be armed and have had arms 'training. Politically difficult because generally  young Nazis. Useful source of cheap labour which frees  troops for forward duties.  c. Uniform. Bark khaki-green tunic lighter khaki trousers  jaelc Foots soft peaked cap badge a spade on hat and left sleeve may have arm-band 'Reichsarbeitsdienst1 on lower left arm. 5. lodt Organisation O.T. a. Yfork and Character. Not officially a Party formation but created by Nazi regime and under Party control. Important constructional and engineering work for build ing and maintenance of roads fortifications aerodromes camps bridges dumps etc. usually on behalf of Wehrmacht.  technicians mainly German but large majority of manual workers foreign. Latter over a million include volun teers conscripts temporary local workers and Russian  P.W.s. All under military discipline. Civilian contrac tors may carry out work for O.T. for which time their workers become part of O.T. and subject to its discipline. Importance. Apart from constructional work O.T will attempt during military operations to keep L of C. clear and repair damage thus releasing army engineers for forward troops.  German personnel occupy important posts are armed and  have some military training include guard companies   Wachkompanien . Foreigners most of whom have no Nazi sympathies normally not armed and present no danger.  e. Uniform. Khaki arm-band on left arm bearing 'Org. Todt11 Swastika arm-band worn also by German personnel only soft peaked or F.S. cap usually ankle boots. Captured uniforms also worn. Some.foreigners may only wear brassard. C. FOREIGN NAZI ORGANISATIQNS. FRANCE.  1. Militias of Political Parties See also French Police lecture. a. P.P.F. Poriot Militia - Garde Franeaise1 As well as uniformed para-military body has informant'service in civilian clothes this the more important . Vigorous extremists but generally anti-Laval Uniform. Navy-blue shirt black trousers black tie Sam 'Browne belt badge to be drawn ., C. 5. 6 July 44   R N.P. Peat Militia -'Legion Rationale Populaire' less Vigorous declining. Uniform -sane with lighter Hue shirt. Badge to he drawn .  c. Francisme Bucard Militia r-'Legion Franciste'  riscipTinQd LuV small. Uniform -royal blue shirt tie and beret or ealot dark blue trousers Sam Browne badge to be drawn . Also minor bodies - Groupe Collaboration' 'Ligue Francaise' etc. All belong to northern Zone tut are spreading into South where they were originally banned .  2 hon-Party Organisations.  a. Legion des Combattants L.F.C. Organisation for ex-servicemen supporting Petain and Vichy government. Exploited by the latter and now somewhat disillusioned. Influence of Darnand over it has increased. Organisation may still be regarded as sus'peet but many members not collaborationist. Occupied in welfare work M and may assist police in maintenance of order locally  Its para-military 'formation -S.O.'L. -which broke away ffom it and became violently Fascist ended by becoming the 'Milice Rationale'. Uniform' when worn -khaki shirt black tie black beret badge to be drawn .   k Milice hationale. See last lecture under French Uniformed Police  3. Military Formations. a. Legion Volontaire Franeaise L.V.F. -formerly Legion Tricolore Mainly to organise recruiting of units to fight with German army on Eastern front. Backed especially by Doriot Vichy does not control it completely. Working with Germans. Strength probably 4 000 max about one quarter remains in France. Unimportant as military force. More important for its clandestine informant service Service d'Etudes et de Documentation. Uniform -German army uniform with tricolor shield and 'France over it on left arm badge to be drawn .  b. Premier-Regiment de Franee. Very small military force under 'control' of 'Laval . ' Kecruited on-Fascist lines 1943 from remains of Armistice army. Uniform of the latter with the crest of Auvergne on left sleeve. e Anti-aircraft units. Allowed to continue after 1940 for genoraT 'dele'n'e'e' especially of railways. To save German mar -power. Units few in number. Blue uniform of amee de. 1 'air'.  d. French units of Waffen S.S. outside L.V.F. Similar material' to 1.V.F1. Kat'h'o'r more severe selection and training. Trained in Germany but may be used as shook troops in France. Uniform -as German -' e French units of h.S.K.K. At least two regiments of these. More used as labour units than as drivers. Quite well M paid. Most go to Russia. Uniform as German.  4. Youth Organisations. ... Vichy active in this respect because pro-Uazis sought, C. 5 7  support amongst the young anti because of youth problem following the armistice. In both respects has mainly failed.  r  Chantiers de la Jeunesse. A compulsory labour service generally for 'eight' months in the course of a man's twentieth year. Semi-military discipline. A reservoir of cheap labour -for agriculture forestry roadbuilding clearing of bombed towns etc. Officially under Laval's control but much anti-hazi feeling. Disbanded July 1944 probably for this reason. Had been depleted by conscription for work in Germany.  Uniform -Dark green with beret short tunic with open collar and slacks. Also gaiters and boots Khaki shirt badge to be drawn .  b. Alternative Organisations -for compulsory service 'C. de J. de la Marine' -seamanship. 'Jeunesse et Montague' -ski-ing and mountain life.  c 'Jeunesse de France et d'outre Mer' -voluntary collaborationist and connected with P.P.F.  oOo, 0 6/7 'Jane 1944 KSCOGKFUICM OF GERIVMtl TROOPS -I & II A. INTRODCJCT ION The object is to teach the agent within the time available and without assuming any previous military knowledge how to recognize different types of German troogs. Since German army organisation is not only complicated but very flexible it is intended to emphasise only the distinction between the different arms of the service according to   a Weapons together with equipment and transport where relevant. C.6/7 .  b Uniforms C.8 Except for the infantry company which is of direct interest from the point of view of active operations detailed organisation of the various units and formations will be avoided B. GMERAI ORGANIZATION The following background information on this subject will be found useful. It will be given to students as and when considered necessary. a. Strength. The strength of the German army May 1944 is.made up approximately as  follows - Divisions Infantry 240 100 of these are not first-line troops. The men march and transport is mainly horsed. Striking force -3 infantry regts. Average strength complete now -12 000 men.  Armoured 25 Entirely mechanised.  Panzer Striking force - 1 tank regt.  usually 150-200 tanks .  2 motorised infantry regts. Average strength complete now -17 000 men. Motorised 25 Entirely mechanised.  Panzergrenadier Striking force - 2 motorised infantry regts.  usually 1 assault gun battalion. Average strength complete now -14 000 men. Mountain 10 Large proportion of pack transport. Special  jager light equipment. Organisation and strength very flexible. Usually smaller than infantry div i.e 2 mountain rifle regts. 500 G.A.E. Field 30 Include infantry for aerodrome defence AA and divs. parachutists infantry weaker in strength and arms than corresponding army units. Total 330 t, 0.6/7. -2-June 1944  Kote - i Some 17 S.S. Divisions are included in the above mainly armoured. and motorisods their strength is generally higher than that of the normal army formations may be over 20 000 .   ii ' Apart from the striking force the following supporting arms are comprised in each division field artillery A/T A/A engineers signals medioal supply.  b. A general idea of the current distribution of German divisions in relevant parts f Europe will bo given. c. The following are the formations and units in which the German amor is organised - Approx. Strength  Amy Group Variable Battalion 600 -800  Amy Company 150 -180  Corps Platoon -35 r-40 -&L ZUg  Division 12 000 -20 000 Soction -10 Gruppe  Regiment 2 000 -3 000  Approx  Brigade  O. ARMS OF THE SERVICE distinguished by vaAPOHS and where important transport and equipment . This Information will be given in conjunction with the following material  i. Selected pictures of all weapons ii. Model tanks. iii. W.0 publication 'German Weapons Illustrated iv. Specimens of German light weapons. Examined 1. MFANTRY Non-mechanised -. a. Weapons used by the Rifle Qompcmy. Rifle -Mauser 7.92.mm and bayonet. Stick or egg grenade Pistol -Luger 9 mm. Machine pistol -Schmoissor M.P. 38 or 40. 9 Iran.  L.M.G. 34 or 42 7.92 mm. A/T rifle -7.92. mm. Light mortar 55 mm. Heavy mortar 81 mm. Heavy K.G. 34 or 42 tripod mounting . Notes-The two latter may be in a separate heavy company.  15 Heavy weapons used by the Infantry  i. Infantry Howitzers. 75 mm Most numerous . 150 mm., Jrme 1944   0.6/7 3   ii. Anti-Taak G-uns. 50 .mm. Most numerous 37 mm.  c. Organisation of Riflo Company. The system now most frequently mot with is as follows s Section -10 men 1 N.C.O. -machine pistol  3 men -crow of L.M.G. 4 or 42.  6 men -. rifles bayonets grenades.  Platoon -35-40 men  3 Sections plus flight or heavy'mortar  l x 50 ffinn or 81 mm.  Company -150 men  3 Platoons plus A/T riflo 3 x 7.92 mm.  section.  Mote -An stated above the rifle company may also include heavy M.Gs.  / . 2. MOTORISED BIFAM'RY Panzergrcnadiero  Motorised Infantry can be contrasted with non-mechanised infantry in two main respects  a. Transport. The troops are carried in the following main types of vehicle i. nnarmourGd lorries. ii. Unannoured half-track vehicles iii. Armoured half-track vehicles.  These may be equipped with L.M.Gs and sometimes with radio h. Weapons. i. In general the same weapons are used as in the case of the non' mechanised infantry with the exception of the following light weapons -   Anti-Tank rifle 55 mm. mortar 37 mm and 50 mm. anti-tank guns  and with the addition of the following heavy weapons.  120 mm. mortar 75 mm anti-tank guns  ii. Further each corresponding unit is more heavily armed e.g. 2 L.M.Gs per section . Wf 0.7. ARMS OF THE SERVICE -IX 3. FIELD ARTILLERY. / v a. Transport.  .  m am infantry div. the guns ore dram mainly by horsed transport. m a motorised or armoured div they are drawn by mechanised transport  i.e. lorries or half-track vehicles and some may be 3.P., June 1944 b Weapons. The following are the standard field artillery weapons i  105 mm gun how most numerous ii 150 ram howa iii 105 mm gun 150 mm. rocket projectors 6-barrelled firing H.E. are also in general use ns an artillery weapon. Amongst heavier artillery weapons the commonest are the 17 era. and El  a. guns The rest aro mainly super-heavy coastal artillery railway and siego guns. There are also L.M.Gs for local defence 4 AKTI-TAKK Pak  a. Transport This is always mechanised i e. lorries and half-track vehicles ond is often S.P  b Weapons.  50 mm 75 mm Most numerous -E designs 88 mm i A/T  ii. A/A -A/T There will also be L.M.Gs for local defence 5 MTI-AIRCRAFT Flak a Transport. This is always mechanised i.e lorrios and half-track vehicles and is often s.P.  b. Weapons. Host of the A/A is controlled by the Air Force but the army has its own independent mobile A/A unit's which are normally equipped with - E0 mm A/A -A/T single and 4-barreIled 37 mm A/A. 88 mm A/A A/T . The heavy M.G 34 or 42 may also be used as a light A/A weapon. There will normally be L.M.Gs for local defence ASSAULT GXMS MD 0r.rHER S.P. id TILLBRY.  Self-propelled artillery mounted on 'Tirt Qc i r nnrJ holotiG''ng ho armoured divisions . Calibre. Chassis. 75 mm. short Mko III versions of corresponding tank guns.   75 mm. long Mk. Ill  88 ran. long Mk. I - Hornet5 versions of  corresponding A/T guns. 88 mm. long Ulc VI - Ferdinand5, o QA. -5-June  These are generally designated 'assault guns and used moat often .with  tank units . Calibre Chassis 105 mm gun/how. 150 ram. how. Mk. II Mk 17 - Bspt umble Boo   versions of corresponding medium artillery.  These belong to artillery units . 7 TANKS. The following are the main types of Gerjuan tank in regular use with their principal characteristics -   Type of Tank Rocognition Weight Armament  tons  Mark III 6 bogie wheels & 3 B2 75 mm. short former jockey . ly 37 mm. & 50 mm. plus 1 or 2 L.M.G.  Mark 17 8 small bogie wheels & 4 23 75 mm. long former jockey ly short 'plus 1 or  2. L.M.G. Mark 71 Tiger 8 wheels intor-leaved 56 88 mm. long plus 2 reachingfromupperto L M Gs. lower track. Straightsided turret .  Mark.y Panther Wheels as for Mk. 71 Plates 45 75 mm. very long of front side & turret plus 1 L.M.G slope considerably.   Each of the above has a crew of five .  Mark II 5 bogie wheels. 4 jockey. 20 mm. plus 1 L.M.G.  Mark I 5 bogie wheels 4 of which 2 L.M.G. arc connected by girder.   Each of these will have a crew of three ..  Note -i. Marks III 17 V and 71 are the fighting tanks used by armoured troops. The latter use Mark II only for rocce if at all.  ii. Marks III flame-throwor'..funks. iii. Marks II and iv. Captured kronen chassis are still sometimes used but not' by first-line troops and ore becoming obsolete. v. Crows will tank. vi. There may S. MGMBERS. Pioniero . a. Equipment. Pontoons girder and trestle bridging. Pneumatic boats largo and small assault boats outboard motor   /, -6- Juno 1944.  Equipment for layins and detecting nines. Demolition stores.  Smoke generators. Drilling sawing and welding equipment. Wiring equipment  b Weapons.  Grenades a/T riflos L.M.Gsr machine pistols riflas gronados riflo grenade throwers. Flame throwers pole charges.  Heavy rocket projectors H.S. & smoko spigot mortars  c. Transport Infantry Div. -part horsed part mechanised. -Motorised Div.-all mechanised. Armoured Div.  all mochonised includes lorries armoured troop carriers and Mark II tanks.  9. 5IG5XIAL5. Kachrichtero' n. Equipment. i. Wireless portable W/T sets light and heavy wiroloss cars for transmitting receiving and interception. il. Telephonic and Telegraphic Field telephones cables and long 20 ft. polos tele phonic construction cmd operating cars   - -Iso occasional use of lamp signalling dogs and pigeons .  b. Weapons. L.M.Gs and rifles. c. Transport. Infantry Div. -Almost all mechanised. Motorised Div. -All mechanised. ' Armoured Div.  All mechanised and some armoured vehicles.  1Q . JffiCaWAISSinWCE TROOPS Aufklarungs - .  i. Infantry Div. n l'1'™sP°rt mainly cyclists some horsonen and M/0s. b. Weapons rifles L M.Gs light nv trt r s. Maybesupportedi yafew1lightInfantry ndaA nnda very few armoured cars.  il. Motorised and Armoured Div.  a. Transport Motor-cycle. / Armoured cars i. light 4-wheeled.  ii. heavy S-v/heeled.  iii. semi-tracked. Armoured troop carriers. Light cars Volkswagen ., June 1944  b Weapons same with some heavy M.Gs mortans and a/T gunss  Anmoured carsjhave 20 mra. tank guns. Heavy armoured cars may have 75 nm short tank guns.  11. SERVICES Hachschub . As SURELY. Eor transport of supplies rations arms and equipment clothing etc petrol and oil ammunition maintenance and repair work-shops. Along with these units are found - i.e. fRoar H.Q . - Admin staff for rations clothing and pay. Army Post office Eeldpost Eeldgendarmcrie H.Q . Transport.  Infantry Div -varying proportions of horsed and M.T. most often half and half.  Motorised Div. -all M.T. more Armoured Div. -all M.T but/numerous. It will include special vehicles for recovery and transport of tanks. There will be L.M.Gs. for local defence  B. MEDICAL. Medical companies mostly mechanised . Eield Hospitals mechanised . Ambulances mechanised .  C. VETERINARY. Company with H.T infantry divs only .  The following troops do not form part of tho normal division.  12. SMOKE TROOPS Hebei -- Their usual duty is to assist artillery in putting down smoke screens but their training and equipment are also designed for chemical warfare contamination and decontamination  a. Transport -mechanised lorries half-tracked vehicles some S.P. b. Weapons smoke mortars 10 cm. Multiple rocket projectors Mobclwerfor 15 era and 21 cm. Heavy rocket projectors WurfgerSte 28 cau and 32 cm. Smoke generators Smoke candles and grenades.  Note -Smoko-shells may also be fired by infantry howitzers and mortars  13. h.T. PARKS H.K. . -Heeroskraftfahrpark . Separate arm comprising centres generally static for supply maintenance and repair of all M.T. i.e serious tasks which cannot be done by workshop units attached to regular formations ., 0.6/7.  -8-   June 1944. 14 PARACHUTE TROOPS Fallsohiria -.  a. Weapons i. Light. ii Heavy  L.M.G. Heavy M.G.  Automatic rifle  81 mu. mortar  A/T rifle.  75 m. mountain howitzer.  Machine pistol.  75 mu. reooilless air-bomo gun.  Rifle.  105mrn. ' i  Pistol  20 mm. a/a -A/T gun.  Knife  37 mm. A/T gun.  Grenade smoke and H E 55 mm. mortars  b. Equipment. Eor domolitions oiitrcnching wire-cutting etc. For their own engineer signal medical and supply units. Containers some mobile for the above weapons and materials.  oOo  \, KEOOGWiriON Off-G-EHMM TROOPS -III  GERMAN 'iiHifif iUD AIR FORCE -OHIFORMS.  This leoturc will he given in conjunction with  1. Specimens of German unifoi'ias. 2. S.TaS. 31 charts of rank 3. Selected pictures of uniforms A. ARMY UNIFORMS 1. BASIC UNIFORM. Field-grey tun.ic. Grey trousers Black § length jack-boots Steel helmet FaS cqp or ski-ing cap which is replacing the second  named Belt which may be carrying bayonet entrenching tool pistol ammunition or stick grenades. Field-grey great coat   Principal badges and decorations and thoir position will also be shown or described  Other insignia  c The agent or partisan is most concerned with those which indicate the arm of the service In adritior those indicating rank and unit may be found useful  a Colours Waffenfarbea  These are most easily distinguished  i On the edge of the shoulder strap.  They will also be soon  ii. On the front of the F S cap an inverted nV where this cap is worn and iiio On the older tjrpes of collar-patch two thin parallel strips of colour . The newer typer of collar-patch have only strips of green or grey.  The following colours should learnt -   WHITE -InfanL-ry . non-anochmised.  red -Artillery - Field S.P. and array A/A .  PINK Tanks -also  Armoured Recce armoured cars & M/Cs  may have letter A  Anti-tank -may have letter P  MID-GREEN Motorised Infantry  BLACK Engineers  LIGHT YELLOW Signals.  m  The other colours if required are as follov/sr-   LIGHT BLUE Supply, -2- Jtme 1944 DARK BLUE Medicalo GOLDEH YELLOW - Recce -non-mechanised Cyclist & Mounted MAROON Snolce troops e Licair GREM Light Infantry Ifiger and mountain troops PINE with letter I -M.To Parks.  ORANGE Feldgendarmerie - DARK GREM Admin. Officials with secondary colour to denote branch e.g. G.E.P. light blue.  LIGHT GREY Propaganda GOLD Marines coast artillery .  Special Uniform or Details of Uniform 1. e.g. i. Tank troops -Colour -black. Tunic -short double-breasted open collar. Collar-patches have death's head. Black berot or F.S. cap.  ii. Assault guns -Colour -field-grey. Tunic -same as for tank troops. Collar-patches -no death's head as for artillery . EeS. cap. iii. Mountain -troops -Ulci-ing outfit i e. soft peaked cap trousers gathered in at ankles by short puttees short ski boots . NoB Skf-ing cap alone is no indication unless it has edelweiss badge troops of any arm may now wear this. iv Mounted troops Cavalry or horse artillery -  Riding breeches and boots. N.B. Officers of any arm may wear these. v. Waffeaa 3.Sts-Standard uniform with death's head on S.D. or TVS. cap. S.S. collar patches right -S.S. sign left -S.S. rank . Army rank on shoulder. National eagle on left upper arm. vl. Marinos mainly coast artilfeiy -  National eagle and N.C.O's collar braid as well as colour of the arm are in gold. Anchor on each button . Crossed anchors on shoulder strap. Collar field-grey not green.  vii. General Staff -Dark red stripo down outside seam of breeches. viii. Foreign Yolunteers - Uppor arm has badge of nationality usually only on the right., , B. AIR FORCE UWIFOKMS. 1. BASIC UNIFORM. Tunic and trousers -tolue-grey &fcyle of tunic -short loose may wear black bolt showing no pockets or buttons open collar no tie showing no shirt F.S. cap Jack boots as army for ground duties 2 AMS OF THE SERVICE. a. Colour of Afm.-.- Worn as in army on shoulder strap collar-patch and F.S cap. Collarpatch is much more distinctive  the whole backing is in this colour. The following colours should bo noted - YELLOW - Operational flying and ground crews.   ParachutistSo RED -Flak. GREEN -Air force field divisions. The other colours if required are as follows - BROWN -Signalf. PINK -Engineers.  BLACK -Construction units BARK BLUE BARK GREEN -Medical -Admin officials     as nay . b. Special Uniform i. Field divisions -normal blue-grey tunic. Grey-green ski-ing trousers. Jack boots or ankle boots N.C.Os Collar-patch green but different branches of this arm have & secondary colour in piping around collar-patch and shoulder O.Rs strap i e. Artillery A./A A/T engineers recce and supplies -ns for array Eifie units i e0 infantry -green. Signals lawwru  Bffiaors Colourrpatch gx'een with silver edging shoulder strap grey  with secondarjr coloau round edge. ii -Parachutists Undress uriform tunic trousers and boots as for field divs. Badge of swooping eagle ' Operational kit steel helmets -round brinoless over this JStrip-toasegrey-green. Ankle boots thick rubber soles laced at both side Gloves thick leather., 5-  June 1944 3. UMIT. No number will be fleer uerhe.r in the ease of Field Divs. and Flak in which the system and its limited use will be the same as in the army.  4. RMK. Normal uniform -same five groups' as amy into which insignia may be divided but two systems worn together. a. Saiae system as aray i.e i. Aircraftsmen -chevrons if anything ii. NIC.Os. -Collar braid and shoulder iii. Officers -3 types of shoulder straps. N.B. names of ranks arc as in the array. k Badges on collar-patch conspicuous . i. Aircraftsmen -pairs -of wings 1 to ii. ST.C.Osa pairs of wings' with collar iii. Officers below field rank oak above 1 to 3 .  Field rank oak wreath with pairs of wings'inside  1 to 3 .  All the abovo solver-coloured .  Generals oak wreath with pair of wings inside but in gold a 1 to 3 The latter are easily recognised since their distinguishing colour is white worn where red is worn by army generals. Note -On Flying kit training and fatigue overalls.-  No collar-patches shoulder strap or other insignia except badges on the sleeve to denote rank cf. .army i. l.C.Oss -pairs of wings 1 to 4 . ii. Officers -horizontal stripes 1 for bolow field rank 2 for field rank with pairs of wings 1 to 3 above. --gOo--, 0.0  A 8c B June 1944 0.9 A -USTELLIGMCE REPORTS  1. QEHERAL INSTRUCTIONS. It is not the essential task of this organisation to .collect and transmit  military information but circumstances aro likely to arise in which the agent  whether his organisation is paramilitary .or otherwise can render-valuable  service by doing so. The following limitations must however be observed  a He will at no time neglect or prejudice his primary mission the information he sends indicated below will be obtained in the course of his normal work.  b. Reports will be simple non-technical statement of fact i.e. of what he or others have seen such as could bo based on the outline knowledge contained in the foregoing lectures . He will not attempt to interpret their signifi cance. c. Communications before the arrival of Allied forces in his area will be by radio direct to his base in England. It will be by first available sked after information is obtained and will receive priority over all routine matters.   d. Contact with advancing Allied forces will usually bo established only when he is picked up by an officer of this organisation. He will be briefed on this arrangement . Any information in his possession can then bo passed on directly or indirectly to the appropriate military authority. e. Unless especially requested he will confine himself to the subjects under mentioned and should in any case follow carefully the method indicated. 2. WHAT TO REPORT. a. Concentration. i. Concentrations of troops and equipment. regiment i.e. about 3000 men . ii. Position of H.Qs cf regimental especially division and regiment. iii. Concentrations of aircraft particularly b. Movement . iv. Large movements of German Air v. Large movements of troops or equipment  b by road convoys of 8 hours upwards. vi. Movement of A.E.Vs. more than via. Movement of flotillas of light naval craft and of major naval units  viii. Important rearrangement of G.A.ix. Establishment of new large dumps oSpecial measures -military and C.E.  x. Good evidence of preparations for xi. Information about any important in withdrawal. xii. Any details concerning German traps mine-fields etc will be extremely valuable to advancing troops, 0 9 Afc R  JUrfc- 1944.  xiii Any inforiuu.ujc.. agents left behind by the dopai-bing Genaans  xiv Exact location of Gestapo n. Abrohr on G E0p. H Qs and their records.  S. HQff TO REPORT a Principles.  A report to be of value must conform to the following principles  i. Timeliness. Get your information through as early as possible. Conditions change rapidly in war and information will lose its value if delayed.  Do not report things which are likely to be out-of-date by the time they are received minimum delays of something like 12 hours must be counted upon before a formation in the field could act on a radio message sent by an agent. A brief report at once is always better than a detailed report too late.  ii. Clarity. Extreme care in wording to avoid possibility of confusion  iii. Brevity. The report should be as short as is consistent with clarity. Use  telegraphic wording but avoid .''.my doubt as to meaning.  iv. Accuracy. It goes without saying that an agent must never invent never exaggerate never quote as facts things for which there is only hear say evidence. But above all he must boware of these failings in others vanity invariably tends to produce them especially in civilians offering military information.  When reporting second hand ovidonce always mention that information is second hand and state quality of source.  v. Detail. Vague and general information is of no value whatever. Tho words  some many a few a lot etc. have no place in a good report.  Quote facts and figures even if approximate. Qualify all estimates or assumptions.  Where it is not possible to identify use should be made of descrip tions never of guess-work.  The above qualities apply as mch to written reports as to wireless messages. If ever the former erne used the value of sketches and sketch-maps cannot be overestimated.  b Formula for Reporting.  If the following formula is adopted when recording what you have observed or when obtaining information from another source tho important points will be covered although certain additional detail may be required in individual cases . Ask yourself or your informant those questions -   Q. Where A. Exact location of object or events map reference whore possible . Q . When A Time and date of events observed,  9 A.cc E  3 Juno 1944 Q T/i/lio or what A. Identity or description of objoct of ohsctration Q . How many or how rnuclj A. Estimated nutiiber or quantity i.e. numorically in case of troops not in terms of formations Approximate limits can at least be given c.g. between 5000 and 10 000 . As stated above avoid attempting to answer the question TOiy  deductions are dangerous and useless unless based on information which is certain and an authority fully qualified to judge. Finally read through your report putting yourself in the position of the recipient and decide whether if you knew nothing of the circum stances you would understand the message perfectly without any shadow of doubt. c. Example of Bad Report. Arrival of troops in small town of X .  Thursday. A lot of German troops arrived here recently and appear to be resting. Some of them have artillery. Otherwise there seems to be nothing unusual about them. It would seem they wore likely to withdraw further eastwards I heard their commander had... been killed and that their morale is not so good . Value of reports Hilo-  Example of Good Report. Same events observed in X.  17.10.44. At 2200 1G.10.44 1 saw following German Amiy units arrive in X by main road from west. Normal infantry uniform. Ho '337 and Ho 724 on shoulder. Estimated number 5 000 to 7 000 horse-drawn transport. Twelve 75 mm. infantry howitzers seen. Vehicles marked with following signs and numbers ... Troops appeared very tired. Billeted North-West quarter of X. Excellent source states they are-resting after service in front line at Y . Students can finally write a specimen brief report on information given. 0.9 B -SABOTAGE OF ENEMY ROAD SIGNS.  [Tie following explanatory remarks will suffice to precede a study of sabotage Hand book Vol. 7. This is another para-military operation which requires little technical skill and which almost any organiser and any section of the civil population ore capable of undertalcing. 1. AIM. To cause confusion amongst enemy road transport i.e. bottlenecks and hold-ups which can have serious effect at a vital moment. It may be combined with actual sabotage and destruc enemy vehicles but this is a much more com plicated operation. REQUIIEMENTS FOR MAXIMUM RESULT. a. Co-ordinated action over a vital area to avoid unduo movement by individuals. b Correct timing when enemy transport movement is at its height i.e. especially hours of darkness which are also safest.  c. Simple methods involving no particular intelligence little or no instruction and no undue risk even women end children should be able to assist., 0.9 A& B June.1944.  Removal of signs rather than alteration or substitution is thus -.  recommended.  3. AREAS RWOLVED. a. Forward areas -unfavourable because of difficulty concentrations of troops. . k Base areas -also offer little scope because of intense police activity and because M.T. drivers get to know the area /ell.  c L of C. -by far the best possibilities because they cover a large area difficult to police troops less concentrated and drivers not so familiar with the area.  4j TIPES OF SIGN each of which suggest different methods show detailed examples in handbook .  a. Diversion signsa e.g. Make columns converge or meet or combine with sabotage. b. Warning signs. o.g. cause halts and delay by warnings of mines booby traps guerillas destruction by removing warnings cause delay or accident by altering carrying-capacity of bridges. c. Danger signs. e.g. cause accidents by alteration or removal or combine with sabotage. d Direction signs. e.g. removal substitution or alteration of signs to delivery filling repair ahd parking places etc. e Speed limit signs.  e g. cause delay or accident by indicating presence or absence of certain obstacles or dangers  f. Unit and formation signs and fla.gs. Individual must really know his area to make it worthwhile tampering with  these and must do. it sparingly.  Such well timed and co-ordinated action would obviously produce best results but even random widespread removal of signs would make worth-while confusion.  oOo, 0 10. July 44  GEKKAIj' IIFAMTRY LIGHg WEAPGITS  1. GEHEBAL Students should he familiar with the most common of these weapons because   a There will he good opportunities of acquiring them during a German withdrawal.  b Some may he already hidden hy patriots and others sold hy German troops.  c Deliveries of weapons hy air from this country may not he sufficient to equip all Trilling to use them. 2 IhSTRJCTIOK OF OTHERS.   a Mejthod. The simplest method is the heat. The agenTTshould teach the pupil only. i Oalihre  ii How to use fire unload use of safety catch sights etc.  iii Elementary Avoid technical terms as far as possible. Adapt the quantity and pace .of instruction to the intelligence and experience of the trainee.   b Security precautions. Students are reminded briefly of the 'security arrangements necessary when an agent gives arms instruction to groups of patriots sec exercise X.13 . 3. EAIDLIEG OF hEAPOES. Students then have explained or re-explained to them the use of the infantry light weapons available and have opportunity to practise or revise the handling of them  e.g. pistols three types rifle grenade machine pistol and light machine gun. - oOo-, C. 11 July 1944. RECOGNITION OF GERMAN WEAPONS -REVISION Students practice the identification from photographs of German weapons mentioned in the previous Armed Forces lectures. By use of the epidiascope the whole group revise together the essential details for recognition purposes which can only he imprinted on the memory by visual means. A comprehensive collection of photographs is grouped as follows stress being laid on the heavier weapons of which they have not seen actual specimens  1. Infantry. a Light weapons.  b Heavy weapons .  c Troop-carrying v ehicles . 2. Artillery. a Field.  b A  c Anti-aircraft.  d Self propelled guns. 3. rmour. a Tanks.  b Armoured cars and other recce vehicles . 4. Supporting Arms . Equipment for engineers signals etc. -oOo, C. 12. July 44.  RECOG-MITIOII Off ENEMY FORGES' UNIFORMS.  REVISION.  Students practise the identification from photographs of all German uniforms mentioned in Police Party and Armed Forces lectures this is a useful conclusion to the course summarizing the main features required for the recognition of all the above types of personnel -essential knowledge for the agent's self-protection and for the obtaining of  useful information.  A comprehensive collection of photographs is grouped as follows -   Folios. a  b  c German Uniformed Police. Gorman C.E. authorities in uniform Rational police of occupied countries  Nazi Party.  a  b  c German organizations Organizations of occupied countries. . 3. Armed Forces.  a  b  c German Army . German air force. Foreign volunteers. -aOo--, MORALE WARFARE  The lectures set out the basic methods opportunities and campaigns of Morale Warfare as it can be carried out by subversive agents  The title 'MORALE WARFARE is preferred to'' 'PROPAGANDA' as it places the emphasis on attacking the enemy's morale rather than on controversial political issues The only purely propaganda element envisaged in the lectures is the advocacy of subversion of the Gexyian Forces -and of their war potential by all means short of physical resistance  PR0PAGAHDA STUDENTS  For students who are to be given a purely propaganda mission these lectures provide useful groundwork. They receive further technical training in another School. When propaganda students' missions are definitely known special emphasis is laid on such subjects as concern them exercises are adapted to suit their particular requirements likely situations are discussed and the D' lecturer in these cases usually acts as Duty Officer.  PART-TIME PROPAGANDA STUDENTS .  Agents likely to have a subsidiary propaganda mission such as encouraging passive resistance in industry and agriculture contacting civilian authorities with a view to undertaking pre liberation requirements etc obtain a sufficient grouAwork to enable them to carry out their task emphasis being laid on their particular subject.  ITOh-PROPAGANDA STUDENTS .  Unless a student Is to receive one of the above briefs they are informed that they will consider this training only as  a Background knowledge b An opportunist task.  a ' Background knowledge. The lectures set out to provide the students Ivitla a useful background knowledge of the work of subversive propaganda In their particular countries. If they are not familiar with the present political set-up and collaborationist groups in their countries a Regional Survey Is given as an additional lecture cf. Regional Survey - Belgium . This Is particularly important for British cr American officers whose knowledge of the occupied countries is likely to be slight A lecture on German propaganda is included to provide the students with a knowledge of what 3s likely to'Influence the opinion of the people with whom they are working   k Opportunist Task. The lectures are designed to suggest to students ways and means of a non-technical nature by which they can attack the morale of their antagonists should this prove to be necessary for the success of their mission. In certain cases a knowledge.of the subject may be valuable in forcing or persuading officials to supply them with amenities or to close their eyes to certain activities.  SPECIAL REQUIREMEITTS  Political Intelligence. Where students require a knowledge of political economic or social conditions likely to affect their work special lectures are adapted to their needs. The 'D' Department is responsible for collecting and filing all political and economic intelligence for background purposes., 2   .gar Eas tern Students v ThesG' r&ceive three lectures - D' 1 and a special lecture oh Subversion of' Japanese Forces -written in collaboration with the Par Eastern Section. Fortnight Courses French Students . Only' three i lectures are given Tinese are D 1 D 2-3 -arid D 9. Liaison Officers . If students non-British 'require a knowledge oT the British YJar Effort for background purposes a lecture on the British Erapire at War is given-with the consent of the relevant C/S., D. 1 July 1944  MORALE WARFARE.  A introductory .  Object of lectures.  -To explain the possibilities of this form of attack on the enemy.  To describe the methods especially those  which can be used by the agent.  To Indicate the campaigns w-ith which the  agent is most concerned.  The agent may be instructed to co-operate in'organising some of the activities covered in these lectures.  B MORALE WARFARE.  Has dual aim  i. maintaining morale of Allies and friends ii. destroying morale of enemies . Close relation which has always existed between morale warfare and physical warfare i.es  i. They are complementary. One attacks the will the other the means to fight. ii. Hew weapons and new tactics often have more' value psychologically than physically e.g. tanks dive-bombers guerilla warfare. ill. Morale warfare prepares and exploits military victory.  C. MORALE. Since the aim Is to influence morale the Importance and basis of morale must be examined.  i. Morale Is important because even in modern war the human element is paramount. Will to work and will to fight necessary to make and man the machines. If the enemy s will to work and fight Is broken the war is won. ii. Morale is founded on a belief in a. The power -arms victories allies comrades etc. b. The competence -officers political leaders administrators workers etc. c. The value or worthwhileness -cause methods employed esprit de corps etc. In order therefore to attack enemy morale or to stimulate the morale of our friends we must bear these factors in mind and see how they are related to the Individual group we wish to affect., D. 1 JuTy 1944. -2-   PROPAGANDA .  A powerful weapon of morale warfare used to further policy even before physical warfare begins.  Example Gorman power diplomacy and propaganda in 19-38 leading to  annexation of Austria and Czechoslovakia.  In war propaganda to foreign countries is an integral part of strategy. It consists of  1. Open methods -Radio and leaflets dropped by aircraft. 2. Clandestine methods -clandestine literature rumour etc. The latter undertaken by the agent is an essential part of propaganda. Close relation of two types of method.  Example German 1940 campaign. Open  from past propaganda giving facts and emphasising invincible might of German arms.  Clandestine propaganda sTimuIaNTing division of allies despondency and panic.    Example Western Front. Open propaganda for future cfescribes Hopelessness of German position.  Clandestine propaganda spreads rumours of German disaster distributes 1sauf-conduits to soldiers.  Clandestine methods will be discussed In detail In the next lecture.  TECHNIQUES OF PROPAGANDA.  There are two techniques of approach in propaganda  White Propaganda which emanates from an auThehtfc source e g from an Allied Government a resistance movement etc. This will be founded on truth.  Examples  R.A.F. leaflets. B.B.C broadcasts. Clandestine Press., D. 1 July 1944 2 Blaclc Propaganda which emanates from an ostehsiTSTy enomy source though in fact it is produced by us. This will not nocossarily be founded on truth but will always be plausible.  Examples  Rac io station which purports to transmit  from enemy territory.  Forgod leaflets apparently printed by illegal Axis movements providing instructions on how to malinger desert or mutiny.  Forged military or administrative orders.  Rumours or slogans which appear to  originate from the enemy.  Black propaganda is only used against the enemy.  F. SUMMARY OF CAMPAIGNS. 1. Subversion of enemy forces. 2. Trojan Horse -Foreign workers campaign o. Passive resistance in Occupied countries. 4. Tasks preparatory to Allied arrival. G. CONCLUSION. Those lectures will explain the various campaigns so  that the agent may encourage thorn whore possible and if able to assist them himself may understand how  his role fits in with the plan.  -oOo-, D 2/5. January 1944. METEIDD3 OF MORALE WARFARE. A. INTRO IIJCTION. This lecture will deal with the individual methods of Morale Warfare irrespective of whether they are used to destroy enemy morale or raise the morale of the oecupiod countries under the following headings 1. Exterior Propaganda. 2 Interior or Clandestine Propaganda. B EXTERIOR PROPAGANDA. Since this does not directly concern '-ho agent in the field it /ill only be discussed briefly. Main methods .e 1. Radio. Disseminates all typos of mass propaganda both to occupied countries and to the eneray. Influence duo largely to its reputa tion for truth and authority. Patriots must be encouraged to obey it and to make provision against confiscation of sets. Note Radio can be ' black or white . 2. R.A.F. Leaflet. Disseminates all types of mass propaganda both to occupied countries and to the/enemy-Has a more regional effect than the B.B.C. Influence due largely to reputation of R.A.F. Patriots must be encouraged to pass on R. A.F. literature'to sympathisers. Certain types to be posted to German troops or administrators. C. INTERIOR OR CLANDESTINE PROPAGANB Either printed in the field refer to recruiting printers and use of clandestine printing sets or sent by container. Necessity for obtain ing supplies of paper and type. Main methods are 1. Clandestine Newspapers. Principal value to raise and control morale instruct oned. propa ganda listing collaborators end agents provocateurs. Examples to be shown. Method of distribution posting in trade circular envelopes. 2. Tract s. Can bo either black or white . a  White Tracts. Principally used to appeal to specific group of population to take defined action-providing publicity of allied war effort or resistance movement to enemy or friendly groups. When tract is intended as jx appeal a method of writing is Title Appeal to group stating importance of sub ject. Grievar os Principal local grievance or grievances which  have occasioned the appeal. Hope Worth-lioness or value of action or lack if action. Action The orders to bo conveyed. Signature Authoritative source., -2-D. 2/3. Jpjmars'- 1944. Methods of distribution Dependent on circumstances organised distribution service jetsam method i.e. phone boxes lavatories cafes otc. postal distribution in packets to known sympathisers scattered distribution at night in defined district or in high wind. b  Black Tracts. Value largely due to thoic subversive nature -inciting the enemy to take subversive action which he believes to come from his own compatriots or spreading disunity usually forgeries of m -itary or administrative orders or invented illegal organisation among the enemy troops. Methods of distribution More limited number required -one or two left officially or in error in places which are frequented by the enemy. m addition to methods as for ''white tracts these can be posted on notice-boards walls etc. left slightly charred and crumpled on office floors or in waiting   rooms left among other literature in hotels etc. loft as if in error or negligence in packets in cafes waiting-rooms taxis trains etc. e.g packet of official tracts marked Vor Officers Only . 3. Anonymous Letters. Used against individual enemies cither Carman troops or collabora tors objects threats and denunciation combined with model coffins . anonymous phone calls etc disguised handwriting threatening tone and source. Example Belgian burgomaster. Technique of approach black or white . Method of distribution by post for security pre'nations see A lectures .  Chain Letter. Used to circularis a specific group -e.g. German troops or patriots objects .passing instructions on desertion warnings of a general nature superstition or prophecies items of censored nows largely used in Norway and Holland where radios have boon con fiscated disguised hand' riting sho and legible containing security instructions and copying insJa otions. Technique of approach black or white . Method of distribution by post security precautions . 5. Slogans. Chalked on walls written on shop windows camouflaged frosting material etc. used for romoralisation ridicule threats etc. or black uses i.e. German illegal source chalk pictures and rhymes can also be used. Used in conjunction with other forms of clandestine propaganda. Method of use dusk or dawn by youths acting under instructions 6. Stickers. Printed in this country and sent by container. Used for stimula tion of morale short instructions throats ridicule or black use -combined with other forms of clnndestino propaganda. Method of use dusk or dawn on notice-boards walls windows or lamp-posts. 7. stencils. Out out of cardboar . or linoleum. Can bo used for raising morale causing confusion or defacing Gorman or collaborators instruc tions., N 3-D. 2/5. January 1944. Method of use dusk or dawn. 8. Ruraours. German abuse of truth in news services has resulted in considerable succoss of rumour tactics. Rumours provide the clandestine propa ganda services with invaluable arm for demoralisation but they should be used carefully and under directive only. Rumours con taining specific promises of allied action or post-war planning will never be spread unless authorita.tively directed. General Frinciples. a. Construction. i. Satisfaction to the current dosiror and feelings -the typo of thing pooale want to hoar. It must bo timed to fit into the mood. It is useless go spread a dofoa.tist rumour after a German victory or reassuring speoch. ii. Appeal to feelings rather than ntelloct. Emotional longings end of war leave infirm suspicions party orgies might of allied arms superstitious instincts  prophecies pornographic instincts relation. Tts and German women fears and grievances bombing Russian front . iii. Basis plausii-.lity. E.g. ' The news of the R.A.E. bombings has been played down so as not to lower morale1 true  'because the T e / ext ' osive they are using is causing  widespread nervous-.eakdowns the lunatic-asylums are full fiction . iv. Must to over-exaggeration. Danger of figures. v. Authoritat5 ro source. Appears go bear the hall-mark of authenticity. E.g. a police agent told a man I met ... vi. Must maid from the Stettin lunatic asylum /ho has just comc- J homo says that the 'nvontor of Pervitin shot himself when ho discovered that all iho take it go slowly mad or be come impotent.  Piacing ir Rumour. The rur must bo placed in the direction of the group who arc ntonded to hear it. The rumour should be whispered only once by the original  rumour-monger The rumour-monger should choose ' f ertile ground for his rumour o.g. hair-drossor dentist bar-maid prost 'J . queue outside a shop etc/ . The ource.of the rumour should be placed as far away as pose .bio to prevent verification or checking up . E.g.  A man I mec in the bus to'1 d me ..... Caro must be taken to intr duces the rumour naturally in con versation. Wherever po uble arrange for the interception of the rumour later to observe its effect. A series of rumour-mongers can bo employed to whisper the rumour each applying the above rules.,  4   Jnnun.ry 1944. 9. Fortuno-Tclling. Used against enemy troops particularly U-boat crews pilots etc. Genuine fortune tellers to be recn xt9d or handing on horoscopes saying they have boon sold to you. 10. Sympathetic Conversation . Certain specified subjects e.g. bombi of Germany Russian front etc. to be discussed with enemy troops by persons who can safely contact them to spread demoralisation must give impression of being genuinely pro-Gorman and conversation roust not bo satirical ' or sarcastic. Intelligent agents required 'Loose talk on the part of the soldier should be discouraged. 11. Isolation Tactics. Encouragement of population to isolate nnl ridicule Gorman troops encouragement c n bo achieved by 'vnisporing ' campaign or care fully sotting an example e.g. Dutch watch trick throats to women /ho consort with Gorman troops use of stink bombs itching powder. D. C0NGLU5I0H. Those methods will bo discussed in relation uo targets during the later lectures. It is important to realise that they must be used as parts of a campaign and not as individmil forms of attack. It is the com bination of pinpricking tactics used on a mass scale which produces an effective result. oOo- i, PART A. B. D-4/B January 1944. MORALE WARFARE -II. SUBVERSION .OF ETIEICT TROOPS. I. INTRO niC TION. ' -  Subversion of enemy troops prob&hly most effective 1. during periods of enforced idleness and uncertainty 2. when conditions beyond their control make defeat likely-or-cause undue anxiety e.g bombing home morale etc. 3. in unfriendly surroundings e g. lack of amusement boycotting distance from homo etc. 4. in unfamiliar surroundings e.g. foreign language unfamiliar food and drink . Such conditions prevail to a large extent in occupied Europe' to-day. The. weakest spots should be attacked so as to produce bad group morale and the desire to malinger escape active participation desert or mutiny. Morale of German troops will vary greatly according to factors such as previous service religion age race or region domestic ties nature of work privileges and branch of service. These must be carefully studied in order to enlarge existent grievances and destroy the desire to fight. BACKGROUND INEOHMATION. The agent will require to possess 1. A general knowledge' of the German unit or units marked down for attack their weapons uniforms and employment cf. C lectures which can be largely gained by local observation and gossip. 2. A general knowledge of the grievancos anxieties and fears which he will obtain by a. observation of German propaganda to troops b. the reactions of troops to events -reactions to news films radio press etc. 1. Propaganda to Troops. The difference between the present German army and the army of 1914 is largely due to careful psychological indoctrination. Such things as a. Officcr-troop relationship -increasing belief in competence of the VlTicers and worth-whilenoss of the cause producing hero-worship and equality of effort. b-Physical training and sports body-worship -increasing belief in the power of the individual producing courageous and aggressive mentality. c. Horronvolk principle -increasing the belief in physical raid racial superiority -the power of the group producing aggressive mentalityd. Fahrcr worship -increasing tie superstitious and herd in stincts -the value of the cause producing unquestioning obedience and fanatical zeal., -2 - D 4 /5 e Careful se3 9ction of badges t embleira oanstant use of 'brass bands 'aula' bbmnBxniW alAg&ji inore'asijig belie'f ta iadividuai vasrch and group worth producing discipline and feeling of superiority and efficiency  It o3e are a ffew of the merfchais of German psychological indoctrination advocated by the German generals after 1918 ard it is by such methods as these that the morale of the troops has been and is being built up This artificially created morale should be attacked each time that its precepts are contradicted by events 2 Reaction to Events It is by careful observation of the reaction of troops to evon'ts' ' 'i.e. military political social or economic that the agent will find many opportunities for attack. The events most likely to affect morale will he discussed in the second part of this lecture PAST II. A. INTBOriOGTIOU. 1. femoralisation. The attack on enemy forces morale will be founded on the principles' upon which morale is based as defined in the opening lecture -namely belief in his power competence and value of his cause. These must be undermined and destroyed. 2 Subversion. At the same time the desire to malinger desert mutiny or escape from active participation must be stimulated by creating the belief in his own power and competence to do it and by the value and vorth-whlioness of his action Example German sailors mutiny at Kiel in 1.918 v/as duo a to their lack of faith in the power of the High Seas fleet the competence of its officers and the value of the Imperial cause b to their faith in the power ard competence of their revolutionary loaders and the worth-whileness of the 14 Points Wilson peace offer B OPPORTUNITIES FOR STXBVEBSION. The following themes can be used as subjects for subversive propaganda. The agent must himself decide which themes are most suitable for the region in which he is working   Note Two or more thomos to be discussed under each main group ing to show how they could bo us d in different kinds of propaganda oeg as a white pamphlet ns a rumour in conversation black uses etc Lack of faith in the power a Of the home administration to prevent bombing and its consoqnencos  Inadequate shelters. Pood supply Anti-aircraft and figitor protection. Uncontrolled evacuation etc, \  I .s' '3 D January 1944 Go-a&eqaonco danger to his family desire to return home. 1 . Of the Wehrmacht to stop the Russian advance or allied invasion. Lack of reserves. Insufficiency of armament production. Lack of air support etc.  Consequence useless sacrifice desire to desert. ° Of his own group array regiment etc. to deal with sabotage and guerrilla actiyityT S3 or Gestapo held up as responsible for hatred of population. Consequence stabbed in the back unable to retreat. d. Of the Luftuaffe to effect reprisals U-boats to prevent .American supplies. Consequence feeling of impotence desire for surrender. 3 Lack of Faith in the Cofflpetonco. a Of the O.K.W. or his local commandors. Quarrels between party and military over strategy. Futility of Russian and African campaigns.  Consequence lack of unity dosiro to-revolt. b. Of the administration. .------- To deal with foreign Labour. To prevent disease and inflation. To effect efficient evacuation of bombed cities. Consequence feeling of rage desire to end the war. Lack of faith in the Value. a. . Of the Nazi cause. Catholic soldiers and atrocity reports. Party chiefs privileges in rations and immunity frm bombing. Soldiers regarded as responsible fbr Gestapo cruelty.. SS repression on homo front. SS responsible for failure of Gorman idealism.  Consequence lack of faith in the Ptthrer and the New Order desire to end war or escape by malingering. b. Of his regiment or company. Officers buying civilian clothes. Troops forming secret societies. Sicherhoitsdionst or Gestapo agents spying on soldiers or  officers. Consequence feeling of lack of unity and comradeship desire to find another cause more worth-while. N.B. Wherever possible those grievances and fears should be localised  i.o local party officials regimental officers N.C.O s etc. ., Jaxtuory 1944 FART III -CiMPAIGNBfG-. The above subjects ax only a guide to the litely weak spots in enemy morale. We will now attempt to build an active campaign. Example anxiety about bombing. Information. German soldiers show strong interest in press find radio re ports of bombing of Germed cities and anxiety about their families. Organi sat ion. We first find localities where the groups can. be most easily aiid securely reached. Let us take a local bistro for the soldiers and a hotel for the officers. Next we recruit our agents -n waiter and -a ferame de vie or a barmaid in the  bistro a wanan receptionist or the concierge of the hotel. These must speak some German. They will be used for rumours and conversation. For writing slogans distributing leaflets etc. 7/e will organise one or two harmless tradesmen or errand-boys in the locality. Thus tho organisation could be roughly /  Cut-Out Gut-Out Agent Distribution Service Phase I. Focus attention oh allied radio broadcasts to Gorman soldiers as opposed to German attempts to hush up bombing news. 1. A rumour spread in the bistro Waiter to group of soldiers One of your officers told a man I met in the bus that his home had been bombed. The officer heard it on the English radio. 2. A rumour spread in the hotel Woman to officer Is it true they have stopped compassionate leave in the-regiment It appears the soldiers had been listening to the English radio. The swine publish tho names of the streets that have boon demolished. Phase II. Focus attention on inefficient home administration -indirectly the'ParSy.  1. Conversation by waiters women etc. in hotel and bistro Topic I. Sympathy with bombod-out civilians and asking why they aro not sent to Franco instead of Poland. Topic II. Asking if compassionate leave is giv on to soldiers whoso families have been bombed out and how the soldiers know where they have evacuated. Topic III. Asking questions about diseases and shock causod by modern bombing. Topic IV. Asking whether the Germans will want more foreign labour now so many places mat have boon bombed asking v/hebbov foreign labourers behave decently with German women workers. 2. Forged Documents left in hotel among magazines giving information about  Bomb Shock and possibility of evacuation to Freiburg in Breisgau see leaflets . 3. Forged Document loft in bistro giving details about The Bofchtosgarten Martyrs see leaflet ., V -D   p. a'/C Janur.ry 1944. Phaso Exaggerate effects of bombing.  lilt 1. A rumour spread in the bistro . Woman to one soldier Tho nufabe'r of brothels that have-been blitzed is so groat that the SS rr.o recruiting girls whose husbands are on the Ostfront. You can t get a woman in Berlin for love nor money. 2. A rumour spread in bus leading from town to troops quarters. Unknown man to soldier A chemist on Ibave from Hamburg tolls' me thoy have worked out a method of extracting calcium from the bonos of air-raid victims. They arc using it as a special diet for children. 3. A rumour spread in the hotel. Concierge to officer Tho trains are being cut down. The station official told mo they arc being used for evacuation in Germany. I suppose you won t bo getting leave so regularly. Phase iy. Increase Officer-Troop mistrust. 1. Forged order loft crumpled up on tho floor in bistro stating  For Officers Only. Men must not be told about casualty figures in Gorman cities. Those are unfortunately very groat. Officers will endeavour to conceal the truth in every possible way. See leaflet. 2. Anonymous chain-letter sent to officer in error giving nows of bombing copied' from Allied radio asking him to copy it and send it to five soldiers who do not trust news given by officers. Phase Y. Active subversion. 1. Forfled illegal document providing names of streets that have boon bombod combined with O.K.W. order to grant compassionate leave to those affected -sent by post to soldier who frequents bistro  seo leaflet . E. Forged illegal document giving precautions and methods for crossing frontier -loft in lavatory of bistro . 5 Slogans and chalked symbols on walls near or in barracks bearing illegal organisation s signature.  4. Rumour for bistro and hotel published in local nov/spapor if possible also repeated by women stating thoy hoard it from some ono who had read it in the local paper 20 officers men from the -regiment crossed tho Swiss frontier at 4 o clock this morning between -and -. They left a letter behind them saying thoy wore joining tho-organisation fbr Ftroe Gomnany. -oOo, D. 6 July 1944. INSTRUCTIONS FOR FOREIGN WORKERS IN GERMANY.  INTRODUCTORY.  Germany has by compulsory recruitment of foreign workers imported thousands of potential enemies. Note -Evidence of nervousness in Germany. Psychological  and material value of campaigns  Allied propaganda has urged workers to avoid conscription as far as possible.  Nevertheless encouragement and organisation of resistance amongst workers who have failed to avoid call-up is obviously important.  This can be done by the infiltration of trained agents. There are two possible methods of achieving this  a .to recruit a suitable to undertake the task  b . to contact a worker from Germany Y ho is on leave leave for compassionate reasons is still granted and give him Instructions.  This lecture contains the principles of Instructions to be given to such agents .  THE SITUATION.  The numbers of foreign workers In Industry In Germany as at April 1944 are s  Civilians in Industry. Prisoners of War in Industry.  Russians 1 450 000. Russians 400 000. Poles 1 350 000 . Poles 53 000. French 800 000. French 870 000. Belgians 450 000 . Italians 170 000. Dutch 300 000. Belgians 60 000 . Italians 150 000. Serbs 95 000 . Czech. 250 000. British 60 000. Others. . 537 000. 5 287 000. 1 708 000  Grand Total 6 995 000 .  Note Figures for civil Ian workers do not include workers from territories formerly foi-oign lout now annexed by Germany.  The organisation of these workers is rendered difficult by the following circumstances  a . The danger of mass reprisals which the Germans would not hesitate to take In the event of serious revolt.  b . The impossibility of sending any explosives arms or wireless sets.  c . Irregular and slow means of communication with countries outside Germany., D. 6 July 1944. -2-   The above factors render impossible such activities as major sabotage or para-military work.  C. ORGANISATION. The most suitable and most secure is the Cell system  of A Lectures . Contacting of compatriots the first step.  D. TASKS. The ultimate object of the campaign is to hasten the interior collapse of German Industry and administration. The tasks to be undertaken ares  a .The demoralisation German workers.  b .The organisation and 'go-slow among compatriots.-   E. THE SUBVERSION OF GERMAN WORKERS. Distribution of printed subversive material can be undertaken where resistance is already organised. Otherwise the best methods are  a .Conversation  b .Rumours  c . Slogans .  Note Effectiveness depends on large-scale use.  a Conversation tactics  i. To stimulate grievances against authorities. Party privileges special rations exemption from military service  billeting evacuees etc. reserved areas for evacuation of Party Officials' families.  ii. To stimulate defiance of authorities. Stories of successful defiance e g  Large numbers of deserters in occupied  countries posted as 'missing1.  Similar opportunities for becoming  'missing' in air-raids.  Comments on inadequacy of police force., D 6 July 1944 .  Hi. To stimulate despondency.  Pear of Allied donibing and likelihood of its increasing in intensity. Likelihood of severe unemployment problem  due to destruction of industry. Foreign industry will collar markets. Inadequacy of ARP arrangements. Bomb-damage exaggerated stories of  other areas . Evacuation chaos. Fate and whereabouts of families etc.   to be Sympathetically' enquired after . Pear and concern over increase of disease. Comparison of labour conditions with  those of other countries. Surprise at bad food long hours deductions from pay graft in shops etc.  iv. Slogans should be spread by asking their meaning and why they appear on walls etc. b .Rumours of a concrete ideas .  Example to be given of one of above subjects used  i. Conversation tactics and ii. As a rumour. c Black slogans. e.g. Scluss and Scheisse. THE ORCARISATIOR CP1 i GO-SLOW AND PASSIVE-RESISTANCE . Major sabotage is impossible. See difficulties in B above . Therefore indetectable Sabotage is indicated. Note Instructions through cell system. Value of Go- Slowr for raising morale of w'orkers . Some hints and examples a .Ask for written orders new machines. b .Reject all articles c .Work well but slowly. d .Obey all rules to e .Make small mistakes and alerts ., D. 6 July 1944. -4   f .Make small mistakes g .Address labels ete. h . Simulate sickness. i .Spend longer time j .Waste oil rubber k .Fail to co-operate l .Fail to understand  French. m .Demand roof-spotters n . Forget to instruct non-qualifled workers. o .Make unnecessary p . Start small fires and extinguish them with  large quantities of water. Note As war progresses emphasis should be laid on importunate demands to German authorities.  G. PLANS FOR ACTION OR ESCAPE IN THE EVENT OF AN INTERIOR COLLA PSE . Preparations should be made for future action according to local possibilities. Following are the main essentials of such preparations a .Small b .Good c .Decision d .Organisation e .Decision and B.B.C. instructions .  e.g. Try to maintain groups as in Maquis Try to return home. Try to seize German arms etc. H. COMMUNICATIONS . W/T being excluded the following are the remaining possibilities a For sending instructions to workers -   B.B.C. news service. It is known to be possible for workers to hear B.B.C. anyway at second-hand. Stress importance of listening as being only reliable way of judging war situation ., D. 6 July 1944 -Camouflaged booklets planted in trains going into Germany and smuggled into camps by existing organisation. Show examples .  -Verbal instructions passed on to workers by French Belgian etc. business men travell ing in Germany.  -Verbal messages by workers returning from leave or new conscripts.  b . For reporting progress and keeping in touch  Some.form of code o.g. innocent letter.   Censorship is not severe .  Existing organisation is efficient and already has means. Reliable workers may be told that this organisation exists.  Note Communication ex-Germany is not vital for this task.  I. CONCLUSION. Above campaign is intended for foreign workers in Germany.  The above principles of Passive Resistance apply to industries' in occupied territory wbrking for Germany. Passive Resistance should be encouraged particularly in those territories nearest to Germany last to be liberated  --0O0-, D. 7 July 1944 PASSIVE RESISTANCE IN OCCUPIED COUNTRIES. A. INTRODUCTION. Allied propaganda encourages passive resistance on the part of all those not already organised in active groups. Large-scale passive resistance is very effective i. Materially i e. causing drop in production delay etc. ii. Psychologically i.e. encourages patriots exasperates occupying power. E. OPPORTUNITIES. Three principal spheres of opportunity in following order of importance i. Transport .communications and vital installations. ii. Industry. ill. Administration. C. PRESENT SITUATION. I. Transport and Communicatlons. Roads railways telephones telegraph and power systems indispensable to German military operations. All above are vulnerable to Passive Resistance as well as to active sabotage Evidence that damage to installations by air bombardment and by sabotage has already affected operations in the West. e Industry. Germany's position difficult owing to German manpower problem. Allied bombing of German Industry. Sabotage' usually the most effective means of denying Germany the fruits of industrial output but not always the best means a .Where b . Where reprisals and deportations are to be avoided. In those cases Passive Resistance can be undertaken and will bo effective. Note -Anti-transport campaign also prevents a large proportion of local production from reaching Germany, D. 7. July 1944. 2  ill. Administration.  Germany cannot administer occupied territories  without tho collaborators in Government and  Civil Service. She depends on the support of  all graded of civil service police judiciary etc.  . Passive Resistance in this sphere already taken to some extent on specific measures e.g. in Franco on tho Rolovo will  a in grea.ter safety  b . Irritate e.nd frustrate Gorman functionaries.  D. METHODS. i. By employees in above spheres 1  GO-SLOW TACTICS.  Best method of organising Go-Slow Is by contacting old  Trades Union leaders. Concentration on Tbottlo-necks In  industry which varies according to the sphere .  Examples  a .Transport and Communications  -especially in loading and unloading trains land vehicles -transposing labels -altering date of last lubrication on railway wagons -removing notices such as Breakable1 tThis side up with care etc. -mistakes in sorting mail  b Industry. As mentioned in B 6. Personnel in factory offices can add to these activities by  -apparent stupidity and inefficiency -prolonging correspondence -forgetfulness.  c Administration. -unnecessary 'red-tape -loss of documents  concentration on irrelevant criminal  activities  procrastination, Dv 7 July  9 44  o -  Note. Discuss simple examples. Not possible to maintain -constant high level of passive resistance. According to turn of events it should be increased or modified. Strikes with limited objectives feasible In certain circumstances e g Copenh en strikes  Italian strikes.  ii. By all sections of the population campaigns. a .Anonymous Lette  I. To collaborators -congratulations for resistance work letter not marked 'Private -threats of assassination or sabotage. ii. To police -denouncing Quislings for under ground activities -reporting plots and imaginary Incidents. b .Slogans stickers  i. Ridicule and threats to collaborators ' Ici habite un collaborateur' ii. Administrative sabotage -'Cancelled1 on official hoticos. c J Rumours.  For demoralisation of collaborators e.g. 'Milice is not trusted by Germany and will be sent to Eastern front'.   Anonymous telephone calls. E.g -cancelling orders  -threatening or reporting sabotage at given time or place.  e .Numbers of 'genuine' prefectures etc. by post telephone or In person.  f .Clandestino press to collaborators. E.g. black lists allied statements ptc  E PASSIVE RESISTANGE.PURIMPrPERTDDR OFCONFUSION.  or 'jrPrio air-raid or In the period Immediately prior to liberation p lsp xp ports on the following lines can be used  cf German 1940 campaign  I. Lights seen at night ii. Parachutists seen descending iii. Guerilla activities iv Unoxploded bombs. v. Gorman personnel buried under debris. Those would be personal reports to minor officials junior officers 1 0 0s etc made by innocent looking persons who appeared frightened., D. 7 July 194 P CONCLUSION.  AUove activities are complementary to work of active resistance. Agents should direct and encourage thorn whore possible. Many patriots not prepared to join active groups able and willing to undertake this form of resistance.  oOo, D. 8 July 1944 CURRENT GERMAN PROPAGANDA TO  TMTGTE .  A. INTRODUCTORY. The aim of the lecture is to point out the dangers of German propaganda now and in the future for two reasons  I The current propaganda has over-reached itself and become ridiculous Is dangerous. Present conditions particularly suitable for successful German propaganda.  ii. The agent can help in combating the dangers.  cf. D.9. Civilian Population. The plan of campaign which appears to be underlying current German Propaganda as deduced from recent output will be sketched out and examined.  B PLAN OF CAMPAIGN.  This can conveniently be arranged under the following headings  1. SITUATION. 2. AIMS. 3. STRATEGY. 4 TACTICS 5. METHODS AND MEDIA. 1 SITUATION.  The planning of a campaign requires an appreciation of the situation. Strategy and tactics both .depend on situation. Aims also con be affected.  Give example e g planning a burglary.  The same principle applies to a propaganda campaign the more so as it must be co-ordinated with general war strategy.  The main factors governing present German situation are  Pisadvantages.   a .War on of two front war.  b .Preponderance side.  c .An occupied hostile to the German Now Order. Under these circumstances complete military victory is improbable. However there are also  Advantages.   d .Germany possessing enormous resources whereas  e  the forces of separate powers., D 8 July 1944  2 Concentration on one side at a time would make military success a reasonable possibility. The task of the Propaganda campaign is therefore clear 2. AIMS. \ The aim of German propaganda is to divide the Allies in particular the hast from the West. The most successful result for the Germans would be a separate peace i.e complete break betv een Allies . Probable subsidiary aims of German propaganda are  a . Inducing the Western Allies to modify the terms of Unconditional Surrender by prolonging the war in the West Inducing war weariness by the use of secret weapons. Note -In German estimation American Election and slow campaigning in the West may affect Allied public opinion during the Winter.  b . In the event of military defeat causing such disunity between Allies and chaos in liberated territories that Germany may profit from Peace Terms .  E.g. in the event of severe disagreement between East and West either side might favour maintenance of a strong Germany as a bulwark. Failing this the difficulties of rehabilitating Europe without firm basis of agreement etc. would give opportunity for Nazis and/or German militarists to go underground and continue. 3. STRATEGY. To stir up all elements of discord disunity etc. To produce chaos in Europe and confusion In peoples minds iScorched-Earth policy faTlfng belief in German New Order destroy any alternative belief or hope. German home propaganda strongly stresses the impossibility of the formation of any alternative 'Badoglio government Contrast this purely destructive policy with the constructive policy necessary to AHIecTPropaganda which has tEe opposite task of creating unity and maintaining morale. Note. Danger. Destruction always easier than construction e.g. present situation in Maquis -shortage of arms perfido Albion etc. 4. TACTICS . I Purely opportunist. Presentation of current news in such a way as to cause maximum amount of ill-will discontent distrust fear etc. Of. earlier lecture -propaganda appeals to feelings rather than reason. Basic themes to Europe. Subsidiary themes. mostly cut to fi't tEeso . Discrediting of G.B showing subservience to U.S.A. and/or Russia. Subservience of Emigre Governments to Big Powers etc Give examples from current news showing how handled to fit this policy. ' NoteContradictions and inconsistencies support main strategy and are not weaknesses . E.g. British subservience to U.S.A. Big Business and/or Russia Bolshie Bogey - audience will tend to swallow one or the other according to their sympathies and fear and despondency will be Increased, D 8 July 1944.  -3'  5 . METHODS AND MDIA Emphasis on Edvantages German propaganda has Allied Propaganda i.e over  a . supported by rigid censorship and backed by force penalties for illegal listening. Monopoly  b . of white1 and semi-white Quisling propaganda. Resulting  c audiences in water-tight compartments.  E.g. difference between Home and European Services Ability Note Success of Whine1 propaganda' depends on the extent of either support e.g. Allied propaganda to Europe or control Goman propaganda to Europe.  Black1 methods when these are lacking. Therefore German methods have gone through following stages a .  Disguised control of foreign News Agencies. Fake Neutral News Agencies Sale of news at cheap rates to News Agencies. Infiltration of 5th column. Intensive rumour campaigns. Pre- b . With greater control of Europe methods became largely white.  c . control and resultant increase of Allied propaganda success black1 methods increased and will doubtless increase still further as war progresses. Examples False clandostines Le Drapeau Rouge - Belgium. La Vole de Lenin - Belgium.. Bir Hakeim -France. False Courriers de I air. With I False R.A.F. tracts. Black Radio. Rumours. . Note Discuss in.detail probable effects of these exam.ples ., D 8 July 1944  -4-   G . CONCLUSION. To believe that Geuman propaganda has no further power is dangerous because   a . The factors generally considered as its weaknesses i.ocontradictions improbabilities etc. are only the tactics which when viewed in connection with the ajjns and strategy can bo seen to be powerful  supporters of the strategy.   o . As tne war draws to an end the common purpose of defeating Germany -which is uniting so many difforent peoples creeds etc is also drawing to  an end.   c . jiS urgent necessity for united war effort decreases so will personal differences political differences national difforoncos notunn to tiie forogpound.  Circumstances will bo extremely favourable for the  disruptive aims of German propaganda  A few practical steps which the agent can take to help counteract German propaganda will be dealt with in the  next lecture. Cf. D 9 Civilian Population.  ---o0o-, D. 9 July 1944 TASKS FREPAIIAIOKY TO ALLIED ARRIVAL.  A. INTRODUCTORY. Apart from general passive resistance to German measures there are a Tew positive activities which can be undertaken by general population to help both themselves and the Allies  Inscructions regarding these have been given by Radio and  R.A.P. leaflets. Local leadership and organisation necessary to carry out  these instructions effectively.  The agent may be Instructed to organise one of these activities as a secondary mission .  S. TASKS. Four main tasks are envisaged I. The organisation of a news service. ii. The safeguarding facilities. iii. Intelligence iv. The maintenance C ORGANISATION OF HEWS SERVICEo The necessity for a news service is due to  i. Probable German propaganda in the form of false news and rumours designed to confuse the public. Ii. In some areas the confiscation of wireless sets. e.g. Normandy Pas de Calais Belgium Holland.  iii. In some areas the cu ci/ing off of electric current. The post method of countering false news and rumours is by  establishing a reliable news service.  Rumours flourish especially when news Is scanty or unreliable  The task is therefore most essential where B.B.C. listenino' is difficult.  In these areas the agent should  i Recruit a reliable man and instruct him to  a. set up a listening post'  if necessary a battery radio can be supplied .  b. circulate the main news items.  suggested methods printing jellograph chain letter ' word of mouth ., D 9 July 1944  -2   c keep informed about current rumours in order to counteract them. Notes German rumours should be easily recognisable to someone following the B.B.C. news and SH1EF instructions. Such rumours will be disruptive in character and will be designed to produce action hampering to Allied progress.   Suggested methods for counteracting  rumours s By starting a new rumour exposing a rumour as such 'tends to spread it  further e.g. ' The Germans are startirg  panic rumours so as to encourage mass evacuation .  Note . Instruction in Security precautions for above.  I SAFEGUARDING OF KEY PERSONNEL AND FACILITIES.  German aim -scorched-earth.  Allied aim -to restore normal life as quickly as  and military possible necessity .  Best way to assist Allied aim is to protect the specialist personnel from deportation etc.  Instructions to those specialists to go underground have been broadcast.  Existing organisations are most able to help them.   Example Maquisards seize a town. Before evacuating again certain key personnel can be taken away.  Specialist key personnel concerned are  I. Dockers road engineers M.T. mechanics. Of direct help to the military In facilitating the work of supplying the forces. ii. Fonctionnaires and municipal employees I.e. gas electricity water railway tramway telephone sevmge key factory workers. ill. Press editors and printing specialists radio  -announcers and engineers morse operators. Of special value to P.W.D. Explain function of PW .D.  Note. Stress Key specialists e.g. borough engineer or borough surveyor not large numbers of his employees.  E COLLECTION 0 F INTELLIGENCE .  i. Military. This Is covered in C. lectures see also Savoir pour Prevoir . In addition to military intelligence to be transmitted by W/T local intelligence will be required by Allied armies on arrival., D. 9 July 1944  3  The agent should recruit a man for the following  duties  a t booby-traps location of H.Q s identifica tions of units etc.   b. be responsible for contacting Allies on arrival to impart this information.  Quote example in Sicily of failure to do this .  x . ii. Civilian. Information required technical details known by the key personnel mentioned in D. above.  4lso Information regarding audibility of B.B.C. This should be transmitted by w T at once as jamminc' can be neutralised.  F. MAINTENANCE OF CIVILIAN MORALE. Of obvious importance in order to obtain maximum assistance for Allied forces.  The agent can contribute in following ways  i. Maintain morale amongst his colleagues particularly those with more passive jobs ii. Encourage unity in resistance.  Danger ox political differences re-arisinr as end of war comes nearer . Morale of Resistance will set the tone for general civilian morale.  in. Disseminating Ideas and Instructions in Savoir pour Prevoir.  G. CONCLUSION. A wide variety of tasks-have been discussed.  The agent when in the field will decide which ones he can undertake according to  a. his orders b. his own circumstances c. relative importance of tasks In particular region concerned. Hobo The agent Is not expected to undertake tasks himself. He should recruit and Instruct others.  -0O0, Political Intelligence Lecture. D Dopt.  REGIONAL POLITICAL SURVEY BELGIUM.  1. CENTRAL ADMINISTRATION. A LEGAL POSITION .  General.  When the Pierlot government loft the country in 1940 they placed the socrotairos goneraux permanent department al chiefs in full charge of their respective departments.  Tho Law of May 10 1940.  Provision was mar c prior to tho invasion of the country for the secretaires goneraux to assume ministerial powers but this did not include initiation of new measures except emergency measures.  Piorlot Letter jiay 15 1940.  Further dofinod their powers and responsibilities. Thoir task was to administer the government strictly according to tho Hague Convention. They were not permit ted to collaborate with tho enemy In carrying out his political or military designs to introduce measures contrary to the constitution nor measures involving a change In the laws of the land. Collaboration with tho enemy was only permitted when tho latter took all steps in his power to re-ostablish and insure public order and safety while respecting tho laws in forco.  Legality further defined.  In April 1941 the Cour do Cassation ruled that the secrotaircs could only initiate such measures as a minister could initiate without consultation with his cabinet colleagues. In May 1942 Von'Falkonhausen decreed that it was illegal to question los ordonnances dos socretairos In July 1942 the Cour do Cassation agreed that tho secretaires could corisult as a corporative body college dos Socretairos genoraux and that decisions thus taken could not bo questioned but that individual ordonnances1 not decided by tho corporativo body could be questioned. This led to the decision of the Cour do Cassation to dcclaro Rommsoo's measure for the grando agglomeration of Antwerp illegal. The judges involved wore arrested and tho judiciary instituted a strike.  B CHANGES AND INFILTRATION  General.  The Gormans have beon anxious to obtain the semblance  of legality and the approval of tho socretairos for thoir measures. Up to tho presont time thoy havo shown no dosiro to replace the legal higher administration by a Quisling government basing thoir policy on tho boliof that such action would produce largo scale disobedience and collaborationist friction. They havo therefore pursued a policy of replacing anti-German personnel with collaborators drawn from different groups., May 1944.  2  Removal of anti-Gorman elementa  They have succossfully offectod the removal of difficult personnel hy the following moans s   1. Refusing to allow officials to carry out thoir tasks when they considered them unsuitable. 2 Introducing the docroo of 7 March 1941 which forced all responsible officials over 60 to rotire.  3 Encouraging the violation of the Hague Convention and thus forcing honest officials to retire in disgust.  Vacancies thus created allowed them to infiltrate selected members of collaboro-tionist parties into the administration and thus exercise pressure on the romainin secretaires and other officials. The various collaborationist parties vying for German favour have pushed the administration deeper and deeper into collaboration through their representatives such as Romsec Hendricks and Leomans.  Promulgation of Government measures.  The Gorman governor of Belgium von Palkonhauson acting through his civilian advisor Reeder publishes  1ordonnances' providing directives for general policy as well as emergency decrees for all matters affecting military security. When the secretaires are liable to be over-ruled by the judiciary the German governor defends them by ordonnanco1. The secretaires generaux implement German directives and other measures are first submitted for Gorman approval.  Changes and Notes on Secretaires Generaux.  . 0c cupant ... 0ccupant Department. in l 940. Attitude . Tn T9jf4T Attitude .  JUSTICE Ernst do Retired DEFOY Walloon judge. Brunsw.ijk under age Yields to German limit lav demands.Appoints pro-Nazi  advoccl ts ' to vacancies. FINANCE O.Plisnicr 0. President Plisnicr du College dos Sec.Gen. Protests but usually yields to pressure., -3  Popartmont  Sccupc.nt'' Attitude  Occupcrnt -WiiT i STa Attitude IKTERIOR J Vosson Retired under ago limit law. . Romsoo VKV deputy. -Chiof tool of Gormans.Ministry enlarged to . include Public Health Gendarmerie responsible for price control and reform of communes. AGRICULTURE E. DE WINTER. Is commitod E. DE to collabor WINTER ation. Founded CNAA.Admins. courts.Ministry enlarged to Include .Pop du Ravitaillemont. PUBLIC WORKS. A .DELMER Retired under ago limit la.w. DE MEYER. Ghent engineer Little influence EDUCATION. M. NYNS. Weak pors onality. Allows Romsoo to appoint C ommunal teachers. Mi NYNS. ' ECONOMIC uFFAiRS. SNOY D1OPPUERS Removed by Germans. VICTOR LEEMANS. ' Militant VNV member. Integrates Belgium economy with Reich. Dep enlarged to include Foreign Trade. LABOUR & . SOCIAL insuMnce . CH.VERWIL- GHEN . Resigned in 1942 After appointing Hendricks VNV to ONT. Office vacant.. COLONIES. E. GORLIA. In London VAN HECKE. COMMUNISA- TIONS. J. CxlSTlAU.Retired under ' ago limit law Replaced by Claoys who was arrested. Office vacant. Other Departments are abolished or amalgamated in the above., May 1944  -4-   GENERAL ADMINISTRATION ' . '  General.  The Germans have pursued a vigorous policy of purging the administrative services. In -this they have only been successful among the higher officials . Consequently many opportunities arise for administrative sabotage and general' assistance to patriots undertaken by the lesser officials. Germans and collaborators have great difficulty in enforcing their decrees .  a . Communes.  The following methods for suppressing the power of the Communes have been instituted  i. The Age Limit Burgomasters Aldermen Communal Secretaries and Police Commissioners. ii. Suspension of Provincial Councils iii. Large scale dismissal masters and Aldermen. iv. Communal Finances to collect the Road Tax v. Direct nomination Ministry of the Interior. vi. Large numbers abolished and merged with towns - Grandes Agglomerations . b Judiciary.  The following methods for suppressing tho power of tho legal courts have been instituted -- B ..  i. Only German Military to deal with cases brought by the military authorities i.o. Sabotage Resistance offences against collaborators or against German ordonnances1. ii. .Punishment without authoritios can be carried out on tho spot imprisonment fines and the arrest of hostages. iii. Establishment of try black market rationing and price control offences. Such courts are presided over by Burgomasters -district commissioners or civil servants of the Agricultural Ministry C1TAA . These are strictly illegal according to Belgian constitutional law. c PolIcq .  Tho centralisation and reorganisation of the police under the Socrotairc Gonpral for the Interior. Higher officials retired under the age law or deliberately purged.  This subject is fully dealt with in 'C lectures.  -o0o --, APPENDIX TO REGIONAL POLITICAL SURVEY -BELGIUI.I PROVINCIAL ADMINISTRATION. 1940. King & Parliament  SoncaT 'ef'CTiambro 'Se Repres entant s7 Conseil Provincial 50-90 eTe'ct'ed riioinbers  Sitting 3 weeks to one month each year  Deputation' Permanente 6 permanent members elected by above. Presided over by Governor.  Gouverheur. I Greffier Commissaire Provincial d arrondissement Since 1940. Gennan Authorities Reeder Socretairos Goneraux  Trine xpaliy 'Roms e'eT  Pepatation Permanente 1argeT liominal ed byliin.'of Int.  Gouverneur GrofTier Provincial Commissaires d1arrondissement MUNICIPAL ADI ILNISTRATI ON  Tommuhos 1940 King Gqyernrnent f \ Gouvorneur Consoil Communa1e j Elected by Coirumine College des Burgomestre j et Echo vins i elected by above Burgomestre nominated by King on recommendation of Consoil Commune r  Recoveur C ommunale. Commissaire de P 61i c o  CommisJairo db Tolrc e XcTjoTnt  j Secretaire C oimnuna'l e. Since 1940 . .Ministcro do 1' inter ieur TRoms qgT College dos Burgomestre et  Echovins largely nomiiTated I -Burgomestro p.1 . -Commissaire de Police. . Rocoveur C ommunaleT Co iimissaire de ' Police Adjoint. by above ' Secretaire C oinmunale., Political Intelligence Lecture. D' Dopjt. May 1944  BELQIAN COLLABORATIONIST PARTIES .  1. GENERAL. Collaborationist parties form a minute but noisy minority of the Belgian population the la-'rge majority of whom are resistant to the occupying authorities.  Although most of the parties existed before the war their policy has radically changed since the occupation. Many old members realising their mistake have left these parties. The parties have since been joined by ambitious opportunist elements who were anxious to secure financial or social promotion. As a result these pro-German parties have few high grade members capable of filling important administrative posts. This largely explains why Germany has not encouraged the formation of a National Government as she has in Prance .  The Belgian collaborators are however a danger to the loyal elements of the population. Their knowledge of local conditions personnel geography and papers being fully exploited by the Germans Many of them have turned informers or have been appointed to positions of authority. In addition many of the parties have armed militias who may co-operate with the German or National Police forces.  When co-operating with the police they considerably lessen the aid which the latter might be inclined to extend to patriotic movomonts. Collaborationist Militias are fully dealt with in C lectures.  The parties and movements are divided into the three following categories  a Belgiciste Movement. b Flemish Collaborationist Parties c 'Walloon I u  2 1BELGICISTEt MOVEMENT.  There is no political organisation of this movement permitted by the occupying authority. They consist mostly of Brussels Intellectuals who are inclined towards Germany in order to further their personal ambitions. They consider themselves as realists' and preach acceptance of the fait accompli . They favour the establishment of an Independent Belgian state with no Flemish secession within the German hegemony of Europe. They try to influence Germany towards this policy by their writing. They arfe not extremists and often mildly criticise extremist tendencies In other parties. They often adopt an attitude of pity for the misguided loyalists.  Their principal Adherents ares   a Henri de Man pre-war leader of Labour Party. Immediately after the Armistice he hurried to Brussels and tried to form a United Belgian Party prepared to co-operate with Germany and thus save the county's independence. He founded U.T M.I Union des Travallleurs Manuels et IntelleclueIs which has officially replaced the old trades unions. He founded a. daily paper which represents his views - SiLo Travail'1 . He has now disappeared from active polf€ icaT Tife and has undoubtedly incurred German displeasure, 2   b . Delvo a Flomish traitor now head of U.T.M.I.  c . The Brussels Journalists.  Principally Raymond de Becker of iLe Soir'. .and' Robert Poulet of ' Le llouveau Journal Most Belgian journalists at present writing In the national press have 1Beigiciste political sentiments.  3. FLEKISH GOLLABORATIOKIST PARTIES It is not unnatural that the largest number of collaborators are to be found in Flanders owing'to the long-standing feud with the Walloons. The greatest confusion exists as to national aims This is due to the fact that Germany has purposely refrained from announcing her policy for the future Flemish.State.  a V M . Vlaamsch Rational Verbond .  A pre-war Flemish Rational Party whose foreign policy lednt towards-Germany as opposed to French leanings of the Walloons. In 1941 other Flemish move ments were incorporated notably Verdinaso and Rex Vlaanderen. Membership In 1942 estimated at 100 000. Organisation follows Nazi lines - Leider & Gouleider .  PersQualities . i  Staf de Clerq founder died 1942  Dr. Elias present leader.  Van der Berghe Jen. Sec.  Timmermans Alderman of Gt. Antwerp. Prof. Frans Duels.  Lewridan  Romsee. r  ecretaires generaux.  Van Leemans. 0 Reudricks head of state labour bureau Lambrechts press and propaganda for V.R.V   a They also count a number of Burgomasters and Aldermen  among their adherents. '  General Policy. This is at present confused. Mainly characterised by endeavour to impress Germany with the ability of the party to Integrate Flanders with Germany Holland or any other state the Germans may desiro to create. They declare complete faith In the Ftihrer's good will.  Press Volk en Staat1' .  R.S.J.V. Youth movement. V .R .V .V. Women's movement. De Zwarte Brigade Militia.  b . DEVIAG .  General Policy. Founded in 1935 for Flemish 'cultural' propaganda. A dangerous collaborationist movement  rather than party alining at complete Integration with Germany. Unlike V.R.F. it recruits the maximum number of Flemings for .work-in .Germany or for the Army. It also arranges cultural visits and assists with an Interpreter service., Friction between VNV and Devlag is often bitter owing to the former's desire to keep Flemings at home and the evident popularity of Devlag with the German authorities  Leader Dr Jef van der Wiele. Press . De Vlag  De Vlaamsche Post. 4. WALLOON COLLABORATIONIST PARTIES. Owing to the traditional independence scepticism and pro-French attitude of the Walloons very few sincere collaborators are to be found in their ranks. Among existent collaborationist parties there is a tendency to revive the idea of a Burgundian state .which they claim to be culturally German rather than French.  a . Rex.  A pre-war nationalist and pro-fascist rather than National Socialist party. A large number of original adherents disassociated themselves when Rex showed pro- Nazi inclinations 17 deputies in 1936 4 in 1939 .  Personalities.  Leon Delgrelle 'Chef1. Major SS Wallonia . Iron Cross with Oak leaves  Victor Matthys 'Chef ad Interim' during absence of Degrelle . Jose Streel. Director of Le Pays Reel.  They have little share in the' central administration of the country. Many of their Burgomasters and Aldermen have been assassinated.  General Policy. Rex is largely opportunist. Without openly favouring Flemish secession the policy is to acquiesce surrender of political organisation in Flemish areas to V N V their main object being to Impress German authorities with their ability to form a Government They have actively participated in recruiting for the Legion Wallonie They tried to use the much publicised 'escape' of the Legion at Korsun to gain prestige.  Press Lg Pays Reel J  k A G R A . Amis du Grand Reich Allemand .  General Policy.  A last war collaborationist party. Frankly pro-German without reservation. A cultural movement similar to Devlag tries to influence Belgj'an opinion against democracy Jews and Freemasons Seeks integration with  Nazi Party  oOo--, CODES AND CYPHERS The object is to provide each agent with code and cypher systems suited to his requirements and capabilities and at the same time to maintain the maximum cryptographic security. The student is first taught the basic systems and the instructor then decides which operational variations are most suited to him. The systems chosen vary according to the ability and memory of the student the language to be used the type of work and the country in which the student is going to operate. It is therefore essential to have available a wide selection of systems and to add to them as often as possible. The simultaneous use of a number of different systems also has the advantage of making the enemy cryptographer's task more difficult. with his system each student is given a per sonal identity prefix and a security check so that the origin of the message can be established and its authenticity guaranteed.  o0o-, CQD-uS CIPH-5RS S CRLT INK Am CENSORSHIP INTRODUCTION. Comnaunications form a vital part of any organisation and you will consider the whole question of communications in one of the lectures upon organisation. This and the following lectures will be concerned with the more technical point of view -particular code and cipher systeens secret inks and methods of censorship.  GNNNRAL PRINCIPLES.  a The Need for Security. It is essential to reduce to a minimum evidence that codes ciphers or secret inks are being used. Never keep papers used to encipher or decipher messages or notes of the details of the systems used. Do not keep prepared solutions of secret inks. Make them up from the innocent materials as they are required. Always use the prearranged security check in messages and be certain that it is correct. Remember it is the only proof to the receiver that the message is genuine. If communicating with more than one person have separate arrangements for each. Never disclose any personal arrangements for communicating by codes or ciphers.  b The Need for Care. Great care is needed in using codes and ciphers. One error may result in the message being inde cipherable and cause a serious loss of time. Always check your work by deciphering the com pleted message before you send it. fc The Need for Concealment. In certain cases it is necessary to carry printed material for cipher systems . 'To aid con cealment this is specially camouflaged but every additional precaution should be taken to avoid its discovery. DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of our work codes and ciphers may be distinguished as follows -  A cipher is a method of converting a message into symbols which do not appear innocent and which have no meaning to a person not possessing the key., A code is a method of concealing a message in' such a way as to make it appear innocent. It is a cipher hidden in an apparently innocent communication such as a letter. SYSTEMS. According to individual requirements a number of the following systems will be explained 1. Simple Word Code. 2. Playfair Cipher. 3. Multi-Alphabet Cipher. 4. Switch Cipher. 5. Innocent net ter Code. 6. Double Transposition Cipher. 7. Variations on the Double Transposition Cipher  a W.O.K. systemfb Mental W.O.K. Systems I II IV and V.  c Mental Indicator System.  d Code 53. 8. Letter One Time Pad Cipher 9. Mental Pad System. 10. Vocabulary For all operational conventions on the above systems the necessary individual security checks and identity arrangements will be made., V i SIMPLE WORD CODE A simple word code is the arrangement by conventions of certain words or phrases to mean other words or phrases. Only a limited variety of messages can be sent by such a code as this . Y/hen used -a . b . c . d . Examples -  A. In a Post Card or Letter. The introduction of an agreed name word or phrase into the text of the letter will give the pre arranged message. e.g. The name 'John' might mean I am going into hiding immediately. B. In a Telegram. NO NEWS RECEIVE TOR AGES ARE YOU WELL might be agreed to mean CARRY ON WITH THE SCHEME AS ARRANGED. C . On the Telephone. Veiled language would usually be sufficient but code names can also be used. e.g. two hoaxes might be added to the time of any rendezvous. D. In a Personal Advertisement.  Bicycle for sale apply 6 Rue de la Croix might be a general warning to all members not to visit the organiser until further notice. Note It would in such cases be necessary to be able to produce a bicycle if required. A 'lost' advertisement is very suitable as it produces no reply. 0O0   \, PLAYFAIR CIPHER.  a . Characteristics.  i . Easily meraorisahle  ii . Easy to operate  iii . Secure Tor short messages  b . Uses  lor concealment in an innocent communication such as a letter in internal or external correspondence. This is its principal use. Conventions will be arranged with you which  on may use for the purpose of communication from the field to this country.  n For sending a message through the 7//T Operator  uo tnis country which the operator will not  understand e .g address of organiser. This win og re-enciphered by the operator. This  procedure is complicated and should not bo used  except to serve a real need.  Note  The system Is not sufficiently secure to use as  a straight cipher unless the message is extremely  short -less than 70 letters.  c . Method liftached.  ---oOo, PLiYFAIR CIPHER This cipher first used during the 1914 -18 war combines high security with comparative simplicity. It is based on a square grille containing 25 cells. KEYWORDS. The keyword may be a word cm phrase and should contain not less than 8 different letters and include two of the last 6 letters of the alphabet. The keyword is written into the square. Any letters whi'clx recur are omitted. Example KEYWORD SUPHjEMKNTARY.  f UP LJ MH'T AR Y The remining letters of the alphabet are then written in to complete the cage. As we have only 25 squares one letter has to be suppressed. S JJ P L E y'TcT DP g hTTjccP w v x TO ENCIPHER. Divide the message to be enciphered into groups of two letters o.g ARRIVE CHARING CROSS AT FIVE ARRIVSCHARIN GOROS3AT'PIVE V/hen the same letter occur twice in a group as above - tSS the two letters must bo separated by a null or dud letter which has previously been selected for this purpose. When one letter is left over at the end of the message the group is made up by adding a further dud letter. Example ARRIVE CHARIN GCROSZSATP IVEX There are three possible ways in which a pair of letters may occur in tin. a .are -on the same horizontal line i the same vortical column as opposite corners of a '-octangle. 1. Letters on the same horizontal line Substitute the letter immediately on the rioht. Example NA-TR HI-ST JO-KH When the last letter of a lino is to be dunged return to the beginning of the sane line. Examples MR-M qx-vo 2. Letters in the sane vertical column. Substitute the letter itnmedietely below. Scampies - LD-AJ BH-HQ,  2' Wlien the bottom letter off a column is to be changed return to the head of the column. Examples NQ-BU EX-RE pairs of letters forming ouposite earners of a rectangle. Take the two letters which form the other two corners of the rectangle starting on the same level as the first letter of the pair in the clear test. Examples YJ-DG S UPLE AE-RD MNJT A R XXj WE 1 b cIp 2 RS-ME GHIJ K 0 Q 'Y W X COMPLETED EXAMPLE. ARRIYEOHARIK GORO3XSAEF IVEX RMTKXPBIRMHI 3YMXEOIMRCYPRE  TO DECIPHER. 1. Take the keyword and' complete tho square omitting the agreed letter. 2. Divide the cipher message into pairs. 3. Substitute the pairs into the square performing the reverse movements to encipherment -i.e a. Horizontal lino -move to LEFT. b. Vertical line -move UP. o. Opposite Corners of Rectangle. Follow the same procedure exactly as for enciphering. MMBERS. 1 . If the number to be sent is short for example SEED FIVE GOMPAIEERS ' it is best to spell it out as in this nessage. 2- If however tho number is long for example MAP REF. 873481 it is preferable to replace the figures by letters on an agreed table. A simple table tirould be ABCDSFGHIJ 1234567890 It is necessary to preface these letters by an indicator group to show that the letters represent figures e.g. HR NO FIG. It is also necessary to insert a similar but different group at the end of the letters representing the figures. For exanple  MI ADDRESS IS 297 RUE DE LA PAIX  MI ADDRESS IS NRBIGNO HJE DE LA PAIX Tho massage is then divided into pairs aid. enciphered as usual. oOo, j\roLTI-ALPMBE.T CIPHER .  a Chapacteristics .  i . Easlljr meraorisable.  il . Easy to operate.  Ill Secure for short messages  h . Uses.  1  For concealment in an innocent communication such as a letter. In internal or external corresponaence. This is. its principal use. Conventions will be arranged with you which you  y .ofcommunication from5  one ilolu to onis country.  11  For sending a message through the 71/n operator oo this country which the operator will not understand e g. address  of organiser   will be  -i   n ' e-encipherod by the operator. This proceaure is complicated and should not be used except to serve a real need.  Rote  The system is not  ouffj.clently secure to use  as  a straight cipher  unless the message is  extremely short  less -than 70 letters.  c . Method -attached.  -oOo--  I, MOLTI-ALPFABET OIPI-IEH   1. The system depends on the nnmcrisrti on of n key. phrase feotti 15 to 20 letters long. The letters of the key phrase are .'Lumhorod alphabetically as follows .. c . f- Example Phrase  WRITE U3 WM YOU HAVE. WR XTE 173J ENY UvA  rr e   p. XO ViT7 5 C10 10  Cipher Key 16 10 2. Write out the alphabet A to a and number the letters as follows Basic ABCD J HI L 1.1F P Q 12 34 O 8 9 L21514 ie17J-O 28 29 T U  19 20 21 22 45 46 47 '48  is intended to words in an innocent serious difficulty w' Z in Eroncli. The 42 43 /I.''. W K Y 23 O'1 25 26 a-9 50 51 on include the letters of the cipher .as initial lettera of letter certain letters of tie alphabet will prevido on they occur -o.go X and 2 in English K W5 X and amplest way of avoiding those letters is to omit thorn from the basic alphabet Thus they cannot occur at all in the cipher. 3. TO ENCIPHER. Take the message to to enciphered eogo ENEMY ADVANCE EI7E MILNS TO DA1CAR and write it out under the numerical key as folio's -  Key WR L q  1610 17 Message3 EN YA D v A Hi w   Cipher UX YAN0 M V B BM Message L &T0 D A. ii. E Cipher B ZT 0 Q B U It will be seer from the above MLe nuiteor re reeenningfaf v abet loan on is. i - of each letter of the message T.-added to th xronoor in the key under wmc i written and the al.phaB tice.1 eouivulont of 1. \t earn o the cipnor setter no bo substituted Eog it the beginning of the meosac ne letter . addoci. to ie makicj 21 which in D -IT .14 added to 10 making 24-. which is vD  4. TO DECIPHER. This is merely the remise y.oo. . anoijphonp-onyt . . .e '/. icr rossago is written over the numoricat 2 y. rl the key °.u tracte J. T x m uha cipher me usage p t 3o,  2 a. If the number-to be sent is short for example SEND ITiS CONT/lINBHS1' it is best to spoil it out as in this message. b. If however the amber is long fbr example MAP REP. 873481 it is preferable to replace the figures by letters on on agreed table. A simple table would be ABC BEFGHIJ 1234567890  It is necessary to preface those loiters by an indicator group to show that tho letters re pro seat figures e.g. HR NO PIG. It is also necessary to insert a similar but different gcoup at the end of the letters representing the figures.. For example   MY ADDRESS IS 897 HUE IE LA PA3X  MT ADDRESS IS NRBIGNO HUE DE LA PAIZ The message is then enciphered as usial. -oOo, SWITCH C IPHE R.  V   a . Characteristics.  1 Easily memorisahl .  11 . Easy to operate  ill . Secure for short messages.   b . Uses. 1 . For concealment in an innocent communication such as a letter in internal or external correspondence. This is its principal use. Conventions will bo arranged with you which you may use for the purpose of communication from the field to this country.  ii . For sending a message through the W/T operator to this country which the operator wall not understand e g. address of organiser. This will be re-enciphered by the operator. This procedure is complicated and should not be used 'except to serve a real need.  llote The system Is not sufficiently secure to use as a straight cipher unless the message Is extremely short -less than 50 letters.   c .Method -attached. -oOo, SWITCH  KEYWORDS The keyword may bo a word or phrare and should contain not less than 8 4i ferent letters including two of the last six letters of the alphabet. . 1 THE SQUARE. The keyword is written into a square of 25 places. Any letter which recurs is omitted. Each line and column of the square j.s numbered  1 to 5 . Example 12 1 SUPLE 2 MN TAR 3YBC DE 4 GHI7K 5 0qV WX TO ENCIPHER. a. The message is written out and divided into groups. The groups should contain an odd number of letters three or five . If necessary the last group should be completed by the addition of null letters. Example ENTMT/ADYAN/CEFIT/EMILI /SMJVL b. Each letter is now given the number to which it corresponds in the square reading the lines first and then the vortical columns. The number is put vertically under each lottor. ENEMY/ADVAir/CEEI7/E3S/I1LE/SET L 12123/23522/31345/12411/12451 52511/44342/35533/51345/U434  c. The numbers of each group are now road in pairs horizontally. 5/2/5/l/I become 12/12/33/ 3/11 d These figures arc now resubstituted into letters on the cage thus giving the final enciphered version TJOERS TOAffi YDVXO UGEPE UKSLD TO DECIPHER. a. Take the keyword and complete the square omitting the agreed letter and numbering the cells as bofere. b. Write in the numbers cf the enciphered - -ersion horizontally in the agreed groups . . I2 12 3 . 5 2 5 1 1 UU FRS otCo c-. Hoad the numbers vertically and write in the appropriate letters thus getting the clear version E IT 1.J Y 1212 3 5 2511 etc. P.T.O, MJMEBRS. 1. If tho number to bo. sent is sheart for -oacmplo SZliD FITS CONTiJHEES it is best to spell it out as in this message. 2 If however the number is long for example MiP REF. 873481 it is preferable to replace the figures by letters on an agreed table. A simple table would bo -  ABCDEFGHIJ 1234567890 It is necessary to preface those letters by an indicator group to show that the letters represent figures e.g. NR NO FIG. It is also necessary to insert a similar but different group at the end of the letters representing the figures. For example   MT ADDRESS IS 297 RUE IE LA PAIX  MI ADDRESS IS NRBIGNO RUE IE LA PAIX The message is then divided into groups and enciphered as usual. -oOo-, INNOCiJMT LETTISH CODE  . Purpose To send a secret message in an apparently innocent communication e.g. a letter or postcard. This code may be used either  fi Internally. The particular arrangements will be made between the correspondents. In fact it is not much used in this way.  ii Externally. It constitutes a personal line of communication which can be of the greatest use e.g. if wireless sot breaks down or operator is arrested. Produce example letter. It will be necessary for this purpose to arrange individual conventions. This will be done here. End an address in a neutral country will be given you at Headquarters .  . Ri minor Method. Each letter of the message is placed at the beginning of words ocouring at agreed points in the text of a letter . COIWENTIO-NS TO BE E3TEEL13I1ED. 1. Indicator to show that the letter conceals a message e. g. address signature form of politeness. This applies to all codes. This indication is not necessary for external mail as letters not containing code would not be sent outside the country by an agent. 2. The position of the beginning of the secret message e. g-. at the beginning of a Certain paragraph after a certain full stop at the 20th word etc. N.B -It is easier not to start at the 1st word of a sentence or paragraph. 3. Interval at which letters occur -e.g. every third word every fourth word every fourth and fifth alternately jtc . 4. Position of the end of the Secret message -e.g. at a special word or after an agreed point of punctuation. 5. Whether such combinations as don t1 'ost-ii' rj'ai' 'turn-table' are to count as one word or two. 6. Difficult Letters. Difficulties will be encountered varying with each language in placing certain letters at the beginning of words. These can be overcome by special arrangements in each case. For example in French 'XT can b. shown by words beginning with 'EX' and TK' by. words beginning with 'OH' and 'Z' by. words ending '..ssezr. if this is agreed words beginning with 'EX' or rCH' could not of course be used to show the letters ' E' or 'C respectively and such a word as 'assez' could not be used to show the letter 'A'., 2  ijxample ' A 1 Without working . 59 High Street West Vifiokham S.JJ.13 Dear Mrs. Brown I thank you for the letter and the order. I am afraid that there are several things that I cannot supply but 1111 try to send the errand boy around to you the day after tomorrow witn the r ice matches and suelT. I c annot make any promise for the rest because these days no orders can be depended upon and getting what one wants is quite hopeless. The great thing I think is to use the foodstuffs available of which there is still fortunately  enough. I've got some bottles of salad cream just fancy and I'll send one along with the other goods.  Yours truly T JONES. Example 'B' . Conventions. Playfair Cipher. Begin 15th word of text. Omit X from the square. Interval 3 innocent words. Dud letter -'Q '. End Last exeradiation mark. Keyword. VINEYARDo'. Apostrophe hyphen one word. SQUARE VI N E Y AR DS B CF EHJ ELM0 P QTU WZ Message HAVE CONTACTED FRITZ ALL OK SO FAR STuP S.uND SnCRZT INF Q Cipher CSIY HKIUCOIR GFRUQ REM PO AL HRD RWPK HSDG-BSFAIW NlQV LJTTkR My darling Llsebet Please forgive toe for not having written for Christmas and New fear. Your lovely Christmas letter made me sp very ashamed that I could have cried. You are wonderful to have enough patience to keep on with me. I can Very easily understand your unhappiness but cannot say much beyond ''keep on hoping . The war at long last is going well in Russia in particular and Germany may not last for Tong so I really think we'll set up house together here Quite soon ° So get ready plans for the kind of home you must have. Allow for plenty of garden and of course don't forget all the children Before long you will be here and mining it real so please darling don't worry yourself unduly. Reading about good old Willy's party and the people I used to know was great fun.  Here life goes on steadily much the same. Dad and Mum don't go out much as his bronchitis has unhappily gtarted again so I find myself staying home as much as possible. am busier at work than over because now men leave us every month whom it's Quito im possible to replace. Mery soon only old dodderers will be left As yet accountants of my age are reserved but only just and I that before very long I shall be called up too. &o., 3  c . Writing a Natural Govoriri .buttor. Thj oiussog-j must not onxy bo corroctly unoiphorod and oncodod. Thu Govorlng luttur must bo oompiotuly natural. Thu following points should no no tod  f i ddross -at tho Top of thu Lott r Nov or usu your real iddross or givo any othur indication of your iduntity in tho covering lottor. If you wish to sond your address mako it part of tho s'uorot mussago. For internal mail no addr. ss will normally bo nocossary For external mail it is more natural to give an address and regulations often make it essential In this case give the address of sooiu minor Quisling or any likely address chosen at random Never use an address which does not in fact exist.  ii Insert the date in the usual way unless the letter is to be carried a long distance by courier before posting in which case put the day of the week only.  iii Courtesy Form. Do not use such a vague expression as 'Dear Friend'. They are regarded with suspicion. f iv Length. Short letters are usually scrutinised more closely than long onus. Regulations often limit the possible length in which case write up to the maximum allowed.  v Sub ] eot-matter . For internal mail it should fit in with your cover and that of the addressee and the facts stated should be capable of being substantiated. In external mail this is not necessary as you know little of the neutral addressee and you should never be identified v ith the letter.  Before starting the letter prepare a short summary of what you propose to say. This is necessary as otherwise you will allow the subject-matter to be dictated by the cipher letters requiring insertion and the letter will either harp on one theme through out or bo unnaturally disconnected. Do not write as if the letter was one of a regular exchange of correspondence. An efficient Censorship unit should keep a register of neutral addresses. fvi Style . Be consistent it is easy to be.smooth and natural before and after the secret message and stiff and awkward through the enciphered passage. In the case of internal moil fit in with the general COVer.  fvii Business setters. . If these are attempted they should be done well -well typed on paper with a printed heading., 4  fviii Capitol Lot tors. Proper naaiijs can bu asod but not xc ssiv ly only at th beginning of pregnant words. and not fix Redrafting Socr t M saag . In case of great difficulty it alter the wording of the Secret easier cipher teXt. taay be desirable to message to provide an fx General. It will often be useful to pretend that you are writing to a real person. This will help you to give con sistency and a natural style. d . Individual Operational Conventions. fi These will be arranged and will be those actually used from the field. fii They must be treated as absolutely secret to the individual concerned. fiii A copy signed by the student will be sent to Head quarters . -0O0, DOUBLE TRAITSPOSITION   a . Characteristics.  i . A straight cipher I e. a cipher that looks like a cipher.  ii . Easy to memorise.  iii . Highly secure If proper precautions are taken.  Od . Purpose.  i . Wireless.  This Is one cipher for wireless transmission.  The encipherment is normally done by the W/t operator. The organiser has merely to get the message to him in clear. Note. This does not apply to all Sections 7  If you as organiser wish to send a message by wireless to Headquarters you must encipher it upon your Plajrfair system using your individual conventions and the W/T Operator will re encipher it upoiy his own arrangement.  II . Courier  It may be concealed on the person or written in secret ink.  iii . Carrier Pigeon.  Normally however a special simple code Is used for this purpose e.g. the mere arrival of the bird may be sufficient.   c . General Security Preoau tions. i . Each message must be at least 150 letters long. if the message exceeds 400 letters it is desirable for thp sake of convenience to divide it Into  two or more messages.  ii . The keys must be changed with every message  iii o Avoid constant repetition. For example do not begin every .message T0 HEADQUARTERS or end with STOP. Insert the date at varying points in the middle of the mossagfe. in order to ensure no repetition or words the enemy may guess at the dangerous points -the beginning' and the end -letters must be inserte.d at the' beginning and end of the first cage.   d . Method -attached., DOUBLE TRANSPOSITION CIPIER KEYWORDS. Two keywords are necessary. They should contain a minimum of 10 letters and should be of different lengths -Each keyword is numbered by taking the letters in their alphabetical order reading always from loft to right and the first letter is numbered 1. Example 1st Keyword GREATEXPEC TAT10NS 7IS 4 114 01711 6 315 216810 915 2ndKeyword U S L V E  N 0 DPROBLEM 15 813 9 516 .3 2111210 1. 647 TO ENCIPHER. Construct a cage on the 1st ley and write the message in horizontally. Example -   --' - j  GE E A j..Xp E10rT A T 110 N o  712 4 114 5ir 6 3[15 16 810[sirs' T HI S 0 G E 0 'MTP Ej T   J [§ EDWIT 0 T REG'A 1if  K  TR '  E A i  Pjf.T piq irT'L TS nJiim. R-lI[TX-ijUl ElJ.rs 1i 1Q P -'  Take the letters from the cage in the coOumns in numerical order thus  1 SIAT 3 OCI-AO. 3 4 IWXT etc. and write them horizontally into tho second cago whxch has boen constructed in the some way as tho first thus.-  U N 3 0 V iE D P R 0'B L'E M[-.SI iB '' 8 13 1 9' srffFTB jS'iir ig'loHrlTiriys]   S I A Y 0 G i A' i]0'[ rro rs ittwe tt] '-J1 H Td u j' p T Y jS j ' r-l iR-nrtr I f O' TL j D jFflTU 1T J afiirjTtT-pnoi d  rG' rrDffrloTfTnirrir A I 1 jP 10- 0 I f L Again take out tho vertical columns in numerical order to give the ' double transposition and final order in which the mossago is sent. SRHP0 ST TAI ITNWRT 00IE0 IPIGE S0 IIH 0T 7D R0TDL STEMR EH AAD LDTEU LSAT0 GT3E 64 TO DECIPHER. is merely the reverse of the process of encipherment s Take the 2nd key first and constxuc the exact cage necessary for tho number of letters in the jessagj This is done by dividing tho number of letters in the message by the number of letters in the key .which gives the number of camplote lines and the part line if any to be plr.ced on tho lefthand side of the cage -i o. 64 di/idod by 16 r 4. tf. C3 P T 0 /, 15813 9 516 3 111210 1 6 4 714  Ao J 4 S -till. ..lli 18 -JEt Jt UT H T I P 0 Replace thD oelumns vertically as indicated by the key. When completed this oqgc will correspond to the 1st transposition. Construct the first cage in the same way -i.e 64 divided by 17  3 and 13 ever. 7 12 4 1 14 5 17 11 6 3 15 2 16 8JU 9 13 W i . Read tho letters from the reconstructod second -oage horizontally and replace them vertically in the 1st cage. The completed cage will give the messa p. SECURITY H ECllITIONS 1. Tho 1st cage should never be a complete rectangle but should bnvo a part lino at the bottom of tho cage. N.B. It is preferable to havo an incomplete line at tho bottom of each cage. 2. A number of meaningless letters from five to ten mould be written in at the beginning and end of tho message. 3. The number and date of the message should be placed in the middle of tho test novor at the beginning or and. 4 Figures should ho written out in full -o.g. 1430 hours as iburtee thirty hrs. 5. Tho only punctuation necessary is the word STOP written in full. This should not he repeated more than is essential. 6. The total number of letters in tho massage should be a multiple of five letters so that the message can be sent in complete groups of five letters. 7. It is most important that no more than one message be sent upon the same keys  o0O', -3' Ono Biothod Imown as A to Z V for ohanging Double Transposition Kejrs 1 A pootn or phrase of 26 Tsrords is agreed and memorised by the agent This should preferably be original. It is v/ritten opposite tho letters of the alphabet thus A I J HICH SI B WAMD5KSD K OEE T SAW 0 LONELY L ILnXES U A D AS M AND V CROWD E A NHULS WA I CLOUD 0 WHEN X HOST 0 THAT P ALL Y OP H FLOATS Q AT Z GOLDEN I ON R ONCE  2 The encipherer chooses arbitrarily five letters e.g. IL ZTB Those five letters are known as the indicator. 3. The words opposite each of those five letters become the key oage 0 N. D ALESGOLDENSAW 1815 4 113 821121914 5 91622 223  WANDERED 24 317 6 102011 7 The words following each of the five words used for the first key form the key for the second cage -  H IGHANDIALONELY 6 8 5 7 112 3 9 2101413 41115  4. The message is then enciphered in the usual way. 5. The indicator is shown at the beginning anai. end of the final FULL EXAMPLE BASIC POM As set out above. INDICATOR Arbitrarily chosen RA MZT-  P.T.O, 1st cago. N E N aDEN AW'. 14II 6 9 112 81510 5 71316 217 rN U R ff L E E E M N J Jl f '. L E U.N T Y - T S T T H A S w I L S 0 s 1 T I M T 0 T  E H P I s E S... S R N M A E E 0 a o s E U E T n I M P 0 R T A N T T H A T Y 0 u S H 0 U 'L D 0 B S E R V E A L L T H E s E 0 U R I T Y R U L E S A L L T H E Y I M E S T 0. P A V 0 I D P 0 N T R A. 0 T i 0 N s W H I 0 H A Y 0 A U S E c 0 JL E U 3 I 0 N T H A T A W 0 N B M Dud lett ecu Dud Identity letters of message-. IXusterootyped Total number of letters 185 Multiple of five . ending I W AN DER E DHILLS IA 8 16 1 13 3 5 14 6 4 7 9 11 12 15 10 2 GLNYT0RM C3L G Q 03U TL DH MRDEEP UEET 0 T HA3 WNSTSI0EEHPIA ELA WUALF MN0L0T RA SSE03 TAE VH3NIL30 TEYT00 BEIE TR DUIA UA MT0THVUP3E0PUR W M0S HNYAT3TTAB IE TELS R.N MYL30II B NE ITIHET0 AHSLTIT RR 0 NN0 AE E C TJL AIL0 ME UETSHL C MTj-  COMPLETED MESSAGE. No.of groups Dadicator Prefix -rr showing identity -XXX GPU40 RAMZT 1IDSAB YMOLI NTUTA AOARE ERETR MJSOO HREAH OE3M7 3DJTLH UTORS ATOTN NTEC' ESEEE VAYAO M5PCN HEPS3 SLGTH 3BTO7 T3DUL UEOST STOLA S0IR3 lUINR MGEEL METI TIQEH GIDOA 1ILYH WWOTT SSHCS RLTLA BBYMO ECOTP TLUPB BTOLL iilBEA METNE RAMZT - 185 No of letters in. message. Indicator -oOo, LETTER ONE TIME PAD CIPHER a Charaoteriatioa  i A straight cipher with the maximum cryptographic security. fii Can be used for messages of any length.  iii Method is simple to learn.  iv Messages can be enciphered and deciphered rapidly. b. Purpose. This is the principal system used for wireless transmis sion. c. Material.  i A pad of letters chosen arbitrarily and written in groups of 5. fii A substitution square. See specimen attached. d. Method .  i The pad groups are used once only. fii Destroy used groups immediately. fiii The first unused group on the pad is always used as the indicator for the message never for encipherment. To Encipher. Write the letters of the message text underneath the letters of the pad starting at the second group of five. Pad Letters TOANU PRTOC LEIPM NDEDW EERNH Message -ITIS'M OSTIM PORTA NTTOC Pad Letters NENIC BELNQ SWTSO LRDGT XJRAE Message -UTAWA YTHMJ SEDGE QUPSO FTHEP Pad netters -PRICK ZNSTJ PRCLT XBAEO GNPTP Message -ADCNB Notes -fi Always complete the last pad group used by adding dud letters when necessary. fii ZNSTJ will be the indicator group for the next message. Each vertical pair of letters is used in turn with the substitution square. First the PAD letter is found in the horizontal alphabet along the top of the square then the MESSAGE letter in the vertical alphabet corresponding to that of the pad letter. The small letters to the right of the vertical alphabets arc those used for the cipher text. Thus -P I gives S. R T gives U. T I gives J. 0 S gives F. etc., Final Message GR.13 FWPA GLEQD TOANU SUJFA DVYRM ZWNSL Q1T0GK TOANCJ FJNNT HCAZG 50 OWLIP FTFZQ To Decipher. The same method is used. Thus -Pad Letters -TOANU PRTOC LfilFM etc. Message Letters -SUJFA FJNNT etc. Using the Substitution Square - R T0 gives I. U gives T. J gives I. F gives S. Note -The indicator group in the message shows the starting point on the pad and is not used for encipherment. Ph CO  etc., MENTA L PAD SYSTEM This system is used as a substitute for the Letter One-time Pad system. The method of encipher ment and decipherment is the same as for the Letter One-time Pad system. The operator is given two or three A -Z poems the words of which he transposes using the normal five-letter indicator method. The transposition in the form of five-letter groups is used in the same way as the groups of a Letter One-time Pad. For his substitution square he constructs a Vigenere table using a personal letter. Starting with this letter in the top left hand corner the alphabets are written in reverse. --0O0 , VOCABULARY SYSTEMS  The basis for encipherment and decipherment is the one-time pad system.  Instead of writing the message text under the pad groups a vocabulary is prepared in which the words are represented by three-letter or four-figure groups. The text of the message is therefore substituted by the appropriate groups and these are enciphered in the normal way.  Vocabularies are prepared to accord with the special requirements of the operator.  -00O00   \  /, SECRET INK  1. DEEMITIONS. High Grade Ialcsu These are inks made of rare or complicated chemicals unobtainable in the field. When used they must be taken from this country in some concealed form such as a button or tooth paste. When necessary particular instruction is given in the use of these inks. Simple Inks. These are inks which can be made from materials obtainable in the field under innocent cover. A number will be taught and demonstrated. Secret inks are useful in two ways a By post in external comiamication only. To send through the post via a neutral country a message which would be too long to send by innocent letter code or which contains maps or drawings. For this purpose a high-grade ink must be used. In internal post no inks should normally be used. The reason for this distinction is that  i. in external mail it is not necessary to give the enemy any means of tracing the letter to any part of the organisation other than the neutral address whereas ii. in internal mail the receiving end of the line is inevitably compromised if the ink is suspected. b By courier. To conceal a message carried by a courier either from one country to another or within a country. If a compromising nessagj or a cipher must be carried in writing it is safer for the courier if it is written in secret ink. High grade or simple inks may bo used for this purpose. 3 SITING material. a Choice of Paper. In general as g od a quality of note-piper as possible should be used. The following types should be avoided  i. Paper with -vury shiny surface ii. Absorbent paper. b Choice of luS-kj3-The ideal nib is ball-pointed but this should not be used as it is an incriminating article. An ordinary nib of the Waverley type is adequate. The nib should preferably be of stainless steel amid must be perfectly clean when used. A sharpened match-stick may also be used., HECENiaoi of mmm. - The paper should be placed on a hard rmooth surface e.g. glass or a mahogany table. b The writer should work with the writing between eye and light so that the characters can bo seen as they are written. c Cover up that part of the paper on which the kind is resting. Avoid pressing. It should bo impossible to hoar the pen as it moves across the paper. d There is only one standard that is satisfactory absolute invisibility. WHERE TO WHITE SECRET MSSACg. This will vary greatly with the circumstances. The following examples are given  a Under the cover of tin ordinary letter. This is the obvious and best way for messages passing through the post. In this case the secret message may occupy many different positions on the letter such as  i. Across the the lines is very inadvisable. Covering latter is of course written afterwards . linos ii. On the back. iii. On the inside of the envelope. b On a newspaper. c Within a split postcard. d For a courier on an old letter or document. Here follow details of inks taught. See Appendix. CENSORSHIP 'TESTS.  This nay be omitted if time is insufficient and if high grade iidcs are not to bo used. It is essential if high grade inks have been taught. The main routine tests of the cersorship ere  a Preliminary Examination. Usually carried cut by women who look for anything suspicious in the way of strange wording scratches on the paper etc. Observance of the principles already taught will be adequate protection against this test. b Examination under Ultra-violet light. Some inks are invisible to the naked eye under ordLiury light but fluoresce and are dearly visible under ultra-violet light . Non of the inks taught except wax behove thus but almost all inks ore liable to be detected under ultra-violet light if they are used in an excessively strong solution To protect a message against this test therefore it is necessary to reduce the strength of the ink to the minimum mixture compatible with legibility. c Iodine Developer. This test is by far the most danger ous. The developer will reveal any disturbances of the fibres of the surface of the paper and such disturbances will be created both by passing a dry pen over the paper and by tloe dropping of plain water on to tiro paper this can be demonstrated ., -o-  TROTSCTIOCT AGAIUST OMaORSHIP TESTS. To xaask the disturhamjQ croated by th pen. and ink disturb all the fibres of the paper in the following manner a .Hub the paper on both sides with particular attention the actual spot in which is the secret writing. If this procedure is followed it will bo hotter not to use ruled paper as the linos may disappear with rubbing. b .Either i steam the paper this is the better  ii damp the paper with wot cotton wool c .Press tho paper between two sheets of blotting wo ight. It may not always bo necessary to carry out all these protective measures for example in the case of messages carried by a courier who is not likely to pass any control post. But it is always safer to do so. SUMMARY 0F METHOD.  Tho following ore the steps necessary to send a message in Secret ink when the full protective measures are followed  a .Vi/rito two copies of the secret message. b .Rub and stoam or damp both copies. c .Dry and press both copies. d .Dovolop one copy with tho specific developer of o . If satisfactory i.e. if neither too weak nor too strong write the covering'letter and send. -oOo-I, , 2  Cover. Can be obtained in the form of a styptio pencil for use after shaving. 4. PHCNO LPHTKA LhlN fa The Ink. One grain i/15 of a gram of phenoiphthalein should be dissolved in a mixture of 10 ccs . of ammonia and 30 cos. of water. That is to say a solution of l/5th per cent in one part ammonia and three parts water. Cover . fi Pheno Iphtha lein is an aperient and is usually sold in tablet farm each tablet in this country containing 2 grains or 2/l5tfcis of a gram. fii Ammonia can be bought for domestic cleaning fb Developer . It is developed by a saturated solution of washing soda . Cover. For domestic use. 5. WAXPAPm.  a Cover. Used for wrapping food products chocolate tobacco etc. If unobtainable it can be made by lightly smearing vaseline or even candle grease on to an ordinary piece of paper. fb Deve loper . Powdered carbon or graphite ordinary soot will do . Cover. Vegetable carbon for medicinal purposes scrapings from a piece of burnt wood pencil lead scrapings. -oOo, LETTER-OPENING INTRO3UCTION ' Most consorship is open. -that is the envelope will bo cut open the idontit of the censor unit will bo shown either by pencil fi ures or a stamp and a label will be used to reseal the envelope. In sane cases there may be evidene of testing for writing in secret Ink. 1 L consorship is applied to nearly all external mail. In the case of in ternal mail mobile units are employed and they cover different areas for short periods only. They are often used in on area for two or three weeks followin disturbances or acts of sabotage or during military exercises or movements. USE OE SECRET CENSORSHIP.  . Secret censorship' is applied only to correspondence of people who haye been  black-listed . They may bo suspected of black-market activities communism or other political activities or of being concerned with underground organi sations . A knowledge of tie methods employed may bo useful to you from two points of view a. Defensively. If you realise your mail is being opened in this way it is a warning that you are under suspicion. 13 Offensively. You may be in a position to obtain informa tion from official or other correspondence. The method may-bo considered und r five headings 1. Opening the envelope. 2. Resealing the envelope. 3. Recognising interference. 4. Defensive moa mres. 5. Seals. -' Opening tho Envelope. Materials nocesary Clean blotting-paper. Stainless stool knitting-noodle. A wooden pen-holder which has boon thinned down will serve. Kettle of boiling tor. -  Method a If possible open tho onveiope without using steam you are loss' likely to leave traces particularly in tho caso Of thin or highly   .. lazed envelopes. Keep the envelope flat insert the knittingneedle under the flap .and roll it gently round the edge. Do not attempt to force the'flap and avoid lifting it. . Force used on the flap will tear tho surface of the envelope and this is impossible to conceal. Make' sure your hands are' clean. b. If it is necessary to use steam do so in small quantities' at a time. Localise the steaming as much as possible and avoid the lowci half of the envoi po as the maohine-gummed edge of the lower flap i easily affected. A i elect of blotting-paper will minimise this ri, -2- cor-upcrang. 8.12.43. tlicj Envab-'pi . Matorials noccssary Now oavolopes or spirit gum. Cloail blott ing-p'ape r.  Hot iron. A'flat weight.  Method . t a. If possible reseal with the rigin i'gura. b. If nocossary add new gur to the flap either by moiatoning the gum on eew onyolopc and rubbing this along the flap or by adding ordinary spirit gun with a piece of paper. Care should b taken not to leave traces-of the additional gum .n the surface of th onvolone and not to oyer-run the clearly-defined edge of the original gunmed area. c Ib- placp the. flap c arwifiilly making sure there are no traces of gum round the edge oi the flap. Do not press on the damp flap turn the oavrL.l pe over end press on the address side. place the envelope on a flab suria.ee under a weight for p few minutes to flatten it out again. ' . d. I.L the -stpam has 'cockled . dulled the envelope put it between two . shoots op blotting-paper xi press with a moderately hot iron. Recognising Jh-toyferenco. . It is not easy t -p detect whether y ur correspondence has been opened but oj '.ccumulation of s all signs mpg iyo cause1 for'suspicion. Tlio follow ing are possible indications  pel y in the Post. If your c orrespondence'begins to.rarrive by a later delivery tnan nonnnlly it is -passi-blo th Relay is due to secret censorship. This is a more definite indication in the case ox internal nr.il tha.n in foreign o sirespondonco. . -Zaig he. -n Acvoi'S. Sign. A/oidj pbvious tricks' such as the insertion ox ash or hair in the letter. These will bo noticed by the censor and will merely confirm his a cions.. 's. V '. So ic-special method of sealing t .c' onyolope might bo used. such as leaving a smc.il portion of the summed surface unsealed. If opened and rescaled the-special sign would bo destroyed b storming. c °n °f Envelope. By using the same type of envelope regularly correspondents are more likely to notice any irregularities'duo to . .ndostino opening.  'L .Qencral appoa .-aiicc. When steam has been used it is possible that the surface'of the envelope will bo dulled'or cockled. This is particularly so in the ease of glaaed or very thin envelopes. . n. U-PRosiflap. Tnir llap ic the most likely place to find traces oj. opening. The ed of thflap may show slight traces of tearing o ' the surface. Those traces take the form of few hairs and the use of a magnifying glass is an advantage. A second possibility is a thin line of gum along the edge of the OI 'pH splaslios -gum on the envelope. The gummed part of the flap may have -a ver flat appcaran.ee. in Hi most cases the lower flap of the envelope has a narrow edge free from gum about 1/16 inch . When steam is used there is a tendency for tins free edge to curl and the gummed part of the flap has n concave appearance., Lottor Opening 8.12.43 iv. larilclo tlio onvolo . Open thu envelope completely by cutting the top and side and oxomino the inside for traces of gam or  si ais of tearin Finally steam o.ff the sealing flap md see if there is any ' ign of the surface unu r the gum being torn. Dox onaive Measuros. It is impossible to employ obvious methods which will confirm suspicion bho best defence is to lar.ko the opening rua difficult a.s possible. \ a. Use poor-ou-lity envelopes. Add gum to the flap to ensure that it is firmly '.led. Bhoa-p Manilla onvolopos 'are most suitable. b. Al\/ays use the same type of envelope. c. Practise' opening yc -aolf until you become thoroughly familiar with the likely.traces. d. Arrange some subtle danger-signal. Seals. The use of a seal on the envelope 'makes the job of opening more difficult but in.no way guarantees that it cannot bo done by an export. As specie.I materials are necessary it is imp. ss'iblo for the agent to deal with thorn but by using a c oal he may obtain additional signs that his own corres pondence is being examined. a. The wax may be dull and rather darker in colour. b. flie paper round the war may show signs of displaced wax. c. There may be a faint trace of grease on the paper round the seal. d. There may be small spots of white or other coloured powder on the seal itself. In those cases where it is possible for the materials to bo c.xrried the othod is as follows \ i. Mala xould of the seal with the special-cOEiont. A thin cover rf grease should be put on tho seal before the liquid cement is used. This prevents the hardened mould from sticking to the coal. ii. Break the seal long the line of the flap' and open the envelope . in t. usual way. ' Groat care should be taken that as little steam as possible gets on the seal. iii. Reseal the envelope and then. heat the wax taking ca.ro to smooth it cut so that there is no evidence of the break. While the wax is still soft use the mould-to make the impression of the seal. Netc Great ca.ro slvul be taken in. tho heating of the wax as it ps very easy t j scorch tho pager round tlic seal and impossible to disguise the result., X. 1. X. 2. X. 3. X. 4 X. 5 X. 6. X 7.. X. 8 X 9. X. 10. X. 11. X. Lti X. 13. X. 14. X. 15. X. 15. \ \ SYliA BUS 0 F X -Outdoor j]XJJR C IS Exer-Gises fa fo Disposal of Parachutes. Burying at night and contacting person at a given rendez-vo us . some Attacking railway line  a Reconnaissance and fb .Attack by night. Burglary. fa Reconnaissance and fb Orders and carrying Subversive organisation planning. planning. out burglary. exercise. Shadowing exercise in town. i Shadowing and contacting exercise in town. Treasure hunt. Selection of dropping points.  Fieldcraf t. Reconnaissance schemes in Transport of incriminating Reception Committee.  fa Recce. fb Night exercise.  Clandestine instruction. fa Recce. fb Night exercise.  / town. material. Military Intelligence Reconnaissance exercise. Cut-out exercise. W/ T oporakbrs exercise., \ EXERC ISES  1. General. Two types of axerclse are normally carried out. Firstly 'X' or outdoor exercises in which students are required to practice the various security precautions as taught for the living of a clandestine existence. Secondly 'Y' or indoor exercises which consist first of an introductory lecture followed by a practical demonstra-tion and practice by the students themsleves. These two types of exercise are-considered in more detail below . E. 'X' or outdoor Ex.raises. The way in which these are carried out varies according to the lessons to be taught. In certain cases the exercise is merely a drill to show the student tire-correct technique. fi.e. Shadowing and con tacting in-towns. More frequently a situation is created to serve as a background to the exercise and students are required to use their initiative in carrying out certain common subversive actions whilst observing the necessary security precautions. Other instructors and F.S.P. acting as Gestapo personnel are brought into exercises as opposition to impress further on students the importance of the security measures. It is obviously impossible to achieve a set of circumstances for these exercises bearing any real resemblance to local con ditions in occupied territory. However it is impressed on students that the object of the exercises is to give practical illustration of security precautions and to train.their initiative in employing them and that therefore they must exercise their imagination to achieve the maximum of realism. All exercises are followed by a discussion wherein the students actions during the exorcise may be criticised and corrected if necessary. In addition in order to give con stant practice in the construction and maintenance of alibis students are required to produce a cover story for every occasion on which they leave their school on an exercise the assumption beirg that they were engaged on some subversive activity. They'are carefully interrogated on these stories on a number of occasions during the course Exercise Y. 9 3. 'Y' or Indoor Exercises. These are the normal means of giving instruction and practical demonstration in routine subjects appertaining to clandestine operations i.e. Descriptions Clothes Searches Disguises Interrogations etc. The principles taught are also brought in on 'X' Exercises to give the student additional practice. 4. 96 hours Scheme . The aim of the scheme is to give students an apportunity to practise clandestine life over a period of several days. This is set to all operational students where time and sufficient knowledge of English permits. Where the student has only a, 2  limited . icnowiadgu of Jngiiah .special arrangoaionts havu to bomado. Tho student is d spatoiiwd on a oiission to sotuo largo town with a British civilian identity card or as a foreign soldier on loavo in tho case of a liniitod knovvlodgo of onglish and a pr parod covor. He is givun the natrlu and doscription. of a local man  who is lOiown to bo favourablo to his cauSu. Tho student has to maico contact with this man give him a dofinito job in thorganisation and train him not only for this job but also in general security precautions. In addition ho lias to arrange clandestine communications with the contact. fho student is' also given a target to investigate. Students are instructed to confine their investigations to the Security regulations of the target or the destination of the goods manufactured there. During the exercise the student is kept under observation by the police and eventually picked up taken into custody an interrogated by the police on his activities in the town and on his general cover. In the case of selected students a special agent provoca trice test is laid on during the scheme.   /hen the police contact and agent provocatrice reports are to hand the. student is interviewed by the Duty Officer and the whole scheme discussed'1'n detail. --  This exercise forms a valuable means of assessing a student's appreciation of security and provides him with more realistic examples of its necessity to him in the field. 5. Range and P.T. During the course all students are given daily P.T. instruction and three or four periods on the range. - -oOo, DISPOSAL OF CHUTE .  II'ITRODUCTIOH .  The first thought of an agent on landing is trio disposal of his parachute.  This disposal must be permanent fox'1 discovorg whether it bo immodiato or many months.. lator will load tos   1. Interrogation of'all inhabitants if any in the vicinity and consoguont-tracing of collaborator and ovontual arrest of the agent -himself . .\  2. Enforced abandonment of the h.P. BURhih  If there is a river or deep lake near-by the problem of disposal is immediately solved. Otherwise the safest method is by burying.  If the following principles are followed there is little likeli hood of the parachute' ever being found  1. Avoid ground under cultivation. 2. Digging should be done under cover.. The spot for burial should be chosen in a wood and as remote as possible from big trees because roots are a serious handicap to-quick and silent digging. 3. The parachute should be temporarily hidden while the hole is being dug. 4. Digging ppocedumo Before proceeding to dig roll .up trouse'rs to knee. a. . The dimensions of the hole must' bo approximately S' long by 2' wide'by 2 6 deep and this length and breadth should bo lightly marked out with a spade point.  b .Romovo all pine cones otc. and keep carefully apart. If thor are bramble or ground ivy branches over the rectangle marked out thoso should be carefully \ pulled aside but on no account broken or dameg od as they will be replaced and used as natural camouflage later.  c .Gut down through four sides of tho hole This top should then bo cut again either into smaller rectangles or squares. The number of cuts made will depend on tho nature of the top see diagram .  d Remove each the sixmo order as taken out on a corner of tho shoot or sufficing provided which should be spread out near the hole . This will ensure that the top sods are replaced-in the correct order which is so essential for oven packing  o . Digging should be done from tho insido of tho hole ihat is the digger must work standing in the-hole itself. This will oliminato toll-talc trampling down of Icayv-s oto. on tho odgoa. All oarth should bo carefully put on to the sacking, a. la f .Having put the parachute in the earth in small quantities stamping down quietly hut finaly with both foot. The''tightor the earth is pc.ckod tho hotter and before replacing tho top turf make sure that there' is absolutely no ugivow Tho tighter tho 'chute is rolled the bettor. If thoro is any balloony  ' effect puncture with spado or knife  g .Replace-tho top turf in.' together with pressure of tho fingers.  h . ' Sprinkle' with looso loaves twigs etc. that wore put carefully aside in the first place. This sprinkling should bo done from a height of 51 to 6' as this will produce a more natural fall.  i .Dispose of surplus earth distance away -water rabbit holes are excellent places. Finally brush and switch lightly with a leafy branch the area of the burying site for a distance of several yards all round. Trodden grass should do revived as far as possible by hand before  switching.  CONCLUSION.  Finally sec that shoes are clean -although you may have boon given a second pair., EXERCISE X 1 13 .  Map Ref Time  Date Duration  OBJECT To bury a parachute and find the way to a R.V. at night without aid of compass or map. 1. To practise silent digging. xi To practise camouflage of burial place. iii. To develop sense of direction. iv. To practise movement by night v i thout compass or map. GEI5ERAL IDEA . You are a Gorman agent and have boon sent over to England to carry on subversive activity. SPECIAL idT a . You havo been dropped in the vicinity of  and have made your way to You will bury your parachute under cover of tho woods and will then contact a porsorT who'wxlT bo at This person will give you a message will bo The password After receiving the message you will R.V. at ADMINISTRATION.  NOTES TO INSTRUCTORS  Students should bo given.maps to memorise about noon on tho da.y of the exercise.  Cover stories may bo chocked by intercepting tho students  EXERCISE X.la. This consists ofs    a .Looking for a parachute previously instructor and studying the various points as emphasised in the preliminary talk on Parachute Burying.  b .Burying a 'chute in daylight., EXERCISE X. yjM .c/i  h-  Hap Ref - IBniQ  Duration Recce 1 Kours'. Exercise 2 'hours.  . Dai c  ODJIilGTi To practise planning of sabotage of a railway line.  LESSONSi 1. Drawing up of a plan based on appreciation -mdo after daylight reconnaissance.  2 Stealthy approach by night.  5 Action of look-outs on alarm.  4. Carrying out operations without arousing sentries GENERAL England has boon invaded by the-Germans who '-r holding a lino .  Their supplies are being landed at and they arc using tho railway as the main lino ox cor.uaunication for their forward  troops .  WE- WE- SEiGIAL Your organisation has loarnod tin'-ougl caroloss talk in a pub thatvammunition trains regularly raako the journey to .  Roeco. has rovoalod that tho vulnerable soction of the lino is between and your party will endeavour to cut tho line along this chosen soction.  ADEli ISIINITIOil hour truck will leave at 14.15 hours and you will Recce. have returned by 1600 hours.  Exorcise. Your truek/car will leave at hours and bring you back on completion.  NOTES TO INSTRUCTOR. 1  Dummy explosives will be used.  No weapons will be carried.  Sentries should be arranged for according to tho light.  Sentries may challenge inside ton yards.  If students are able to approach a sentry close enough to enable them to touch his back it may bo assumed that tho sentry is out of action and ho-must retire for the duration of the exorcise.  Tho exorcise will cease on the whistle and students will go up on to the railway whore their line of approach and method of demolition will be discussod., , X. 3b EXERCISE -BURGKiRY X. OBJECT. The object of this oxoi'clao is to -stvo the students an . opportunity of laying plans fo-r and car 'Yihg out a burglary of .a building oithcr by night or'-during iuoaltirao. 2 . IbSepXlJCTIOITS T..9 DUTY jDIXylC . R . The students will work alone or in groups of two or tliroo .not More If only ono house is available several burglaries mciy have to bo. j aatio on the same or difforont nights. Tho building soloctod will bo 'the same school as that of which the reconnaissance has been made. See X.oa . The same procedure of warnin' the School Commandant will bo used as in X.oa. Tho staff will not bo warned. An Instructor a 1 S. T. or a member of the school staff if possible unknown to the students will a Doze or oo in bed in-ono of tho rooms of the. house and/or b . Arriveat tho house during tho burglary and/or c .Intervene If-anything unnovard is. noticed ho will give the alarm. Documents or material such as explosives etc. will be concealed in one or more -rooms of the house. One reasonably accessible window will bo left open or other moans of access made available for the students. All other possible entrances will be -closed in the normal way. Before tho commencement of the exercise the Instructor will superintend tho issuing of orders by the leader. o. IIISTRUCTIQHS TO BTIIDEDTo The students will regard thorns elves as students carrying out an exorcise. They will however be informed that the occupants ox who building into which they are making a burglarious entry must not for security reasons find out what is happening. They will be informed'that documents and/or material are concealed in tho building. At the discretion of the Instractor the-actual room or rooms may bo indicated. Ti.iC'j will O'. -ini ome-.i uhdt entry must bo made-into the house without causing damage to property and that this is possible. They will not bo informed of the. cosition of the window otudem.s may scioci. u. io actual time when they wish to crrrv out the burglary. They will be warned that they must ' . caret nil y i ollo . r.11 iib.-.'. advice th'tt the y have received in tne locturu Oil tnis .juojoct. in genoral it may prove advisaolo to give a hint tii .z an alarm may bo riven and they will have to make a. gut-sway without 'boin/ caught identified or oven seen., I  ACTIVITY-OB1 DUTY OFFICSA .  In goner.- she Duty Of.Tlcor will tako no active part in the exorciao . Students will Too instructed to disregard him altogether Ho will take up a position to enable him bo observe what is happening so that ho-can criticise the students methods at a lator-date . oOo, X. 4 SUBVERSIVE ORGANISATION EXERCISE  MlrTiinmi oTTr atiicToiitsT. '  Duration 1-2 weeks. Time Commence at end of 1st week's instruction.  1 period to start the -scheme and ]. for discussion at end.  OBJECT.  To give practice in  1 Security methods -involving personal security and that of an organisetion.  2 Detective methods  a. Exposure of organisation by agents provocateurs. b. Discovery of agents provocateurs by organisation. GENERAL IDEA.  During this course you will regard yourselves -when not doing regular exercises attending lectures etc. as being citizens in an enemy-occupied country-.  Among you there is a group of agents provocateurs and also a group of subversive saboteurs. The remainder are members of the public.  The identity of the members of each group is entirely unknown to everybody. You 'will establish contact with one another accordir. to the instructions which you will be-given. This should bo done as unobtrusively as possible so that nobody knows who is in contact with whom oxcopt those directly involved.  As the course progressesadvice instructions material etc. vti 11 bo infiltrated to the groups by the D.O.  The highest degree of security will bo maintained by both secret groups. The members of the public have no reason for being discreet because they are not necessarily sympathetic to either side. Neither group should be regarded cither as Allied or  Gorman.  N. B. 1 The greatest discretion is required in the use of passwords which must bo introduced naturally into conversations because you may be talking to the wrong person.  2 Each side will seek to penetrate the other impede its activities and discover its plans.  No arrests nor denunciations will bo made identities and suspicious activities should be reported to the respective leaders.  4. Loaders of both groups and members of the public will submit reports on their activities which will bo discussed at the end of the scheme. -oOo-, lix-oroisi X 5 . SHADOWING ..XJJRGIS.-] IN TOWN. 1. Ob .loot. To m givu studunts a tovm. practice in tho tochniquo of following& 2. Lessons to bo Learnt. fa The methods of following a man unobtrusively. fb The arranging of signals changes of position. between followers for fc The methods for detecting and evading followers. 3 . Instructions for Duty Officers. fa Parties should be split into groups of four students if possible each with an instructor. fb Laoh party should linos then be briefed on the following fi The exercise will consist of as many there are students in the party. stages as   ti Each stage will be of 20 -30 minutes duration depending on number of students and time available. fiii During each stage one student will represent the quarry and will walk round the town accompanied by the instructor and will be followed by the remaining students. fiv A rendoz-vous and time of commencement will be given for each successive stage so that in the event of any follower losing the quarry during any stage he will go to the R. V. for the next stage at the time arranged. fv Students will be tola at which stage they are to be quarry so that they can go straight off with the instructor immediately on arrival at the R.V. for the previous stage. fvi Inter-communication signals between followers must be laid down beforehand to signify changes of position etc. eto. A signal to be given by the instructor at each R .V. as he commences the new stage must also be pre arranged . fc Whil& the instructor student in turn he should show him the methods of detecting followers i.e. shop windows cul de sacs crossing roads looking round at girls eto. In addition he should point out the possible means of escaping from fo lloWer s 'i . e . large building public conveyances etc. is 4. Administration. fa fb Transport to Southampton. All students taking part should be in civilian clothes The Duty Officer will Wear uniform., 1. 2. 3. 4. Exercise X 6 SHADOWING AND CONTACTING EX-RG1SE IN TOWN ' 0 Object. To ive students practical illustrations of surveillance oontacting and the clandestine passing of aiessages.  'L D ' Lessons to be Learnt. fa Shadowing. fb fc Evasion of Boites aux shadowing. lettres.  J ft 1 ' iC fd IVfeiking contacts without drawing undue attention. fe Passing verbal and written messages . ff  g Safe and danger signals. Use of passwords .and cover r conversation fh Recognising a person from a given description. General Idea. a Students are members of an underground organisation operating in the BOURNSfcDUTH area and the briefing they receive from their duty officer should be treated as instructions ftota their section or cell leader. Mounting the Exercise. fa The time normally available will be from 1300 -1830 or 1900 hrs . fb Where possible 2 courses should be used plus as many assistants as are necessary. The followers should consist both of persons nnovtn and unknown to the students in order to deceive the quarry who thinks he has thrown off his followers when he has once evaded the known follower fc As many as possible of the lessons of para 2 fabove should be included. In particular long pauses between operational tasks and long periods of following the same person should be avoided as far as possible. fd For one half of the afternoon students should be given as many as possible of the following.tasks while being followed by persons unknown to them. Boites aux lettrus. R.V. at a fixed point R.V. in a street. R.V. with a stranger from a given description. Passing verbal and written messages. fe Tor the other half of the afternoon students should be given description of persons whom they have to follow and note their activities., , TRL'ASURij BU N T Duration 2 hrs . Ob jgot. To give practice in  1. Deciphering of massages. 2. Construction of alibis. 3 . Body searches . 4. Use of passwords. 5. Recognition of persons from given descriptions. 6. Knowledge of Enemy Forces. This exercise is run in a series of stages and requires a minimum directional staff of four. Fines of ten minutes or so are instituted for mistakes failure to decode etc. Stage 1. Students are given a message in code which when deciphered gives clues to the second stage -the whereabouts of a map. Stage 2. Attached to the map are written instructions indicating a certain spot actually marked on the map where a contact is waiting. The identity of this contact will be established through a password. Stage 3. Students are asnod by the contact to complete a test on knowledge of enemy forces for instance th y may be given a series of photographs to recognise or they may be asked to draw an organisation plan of the Nazi Party or German Police. This contact will give verbal directions to proceed to some other spot where there is yet another contact and will also give them a message to memorise.  A variation may be introduced before this contact by having an instructor who is unknown to the students and dressed in civilian clothes near the R.Y. He will give a similar but wwrong answer to the password. This tests the students' reactions to an unforeseen situation. Stage 4. The students repeat the message to the contact and ia addition have to assemble various stripped weapons. When This has been completed the contact will give directions to proceed to a spot where dummy explosives are hidden. Each student must conceal explosives about his person and must return to his house via a certain entrance which represents a police control post., X. 7. -2 -  Stage 5. At the entrance indicated students go through a frisk search and they are given a brief interrogation on v.hero they have been. The students are then told to report to a certain room in their house. Stagu 6. Students ar asked to describe one of their contacts. After the addition of fines placing results are put on the blackboard., X .8  RECOmmiSSANCE AND SELECTION OF DROPPING POINTS FOR ' PlWmW'oWiaWo s'r . S.efGr enco p Duration 2 3 hrs Time OBJECT. To givo students practice in choosing suitablo dropping points for parachute oporatiions from the map and verifying thoir choice by reconnaissance on tho ground. LESSONS TO BE IE AMT . However detailed a map personal reconnaissance is essential if safe and secure ground is to be selected. Avoidance of a. Trees which would obscure tho lights. b. Overhead wires. c. Rough and broken ground for landing personnel. d. Reliance on woods which may have boon cut down as landmarks. Students are given a map of the local area and are given a limited space within which they may select suitable dropping points in accordance with principles alreadv given to thorn in Lecture B.3. Students are then taken out in transport and they make a detailed reconnaissance of tho areas they have chosen by walking across country. Students should bo shod to judge the strength of tho wind from the highest point in the neighbourhood -and to tate what drift they would allow and in what direction., X.9. . .FIELDCRAFT.  1 Hovj to find your in YJ ooda and close country.  a .Examind i-noda 6n trees uprooted by storm Note In England moss is generally on v/ost .side trees generally tilt to the east  -... - t  b .Examine tracks of lead to a village or to wator. In early morning if pads on tracks are fresh they lead away from a village at dusk the reverse.  c .Remember village approach them upwind. U  '. 'f ' ' o  d .To ensure -finding twigs on trees so that they hang down every hundred yards or so make an -occasional arrow-head with stones leave sticks pointing in the right direction.  2 Where to hide. a By day. i Hollow tree or tree with a good platform dr' suitable bough. ii . Ever groen bush. iii . Hay or straw stacks good O.Ps iv . Pit .'holes'in fields . v . May to September in hay or cornfields  always enter the way it is drilled . b .By night. Safest 1 . Hay and straw stacks ii Ever-grcen boughs iii . Bracken' or heather.  How to detect presonco of other persons . a Byday. i foot from ground. ii . branch. iii .   few dead 'sticks in your track.  iv ' Watch both domestic or wild animals. If a stranger approaches they will all look the same way Cows start mooing sheep bloating etc  Wi\.L  By night. If a stranger approaches  i . Rabbits will make a thumping sound on tho ground door will give a kind of bark., X 9.  2   ii . Pigeons are very easily disturbed and--. easily leave their roosts. '  .ii .Pldvers-call out.  iv If you lie flat and put your ear to the ground you will hoar footsteps and be able to see quite a distance on the darkest night 1  V/here to live in the open.  a . Edge' of woods . b . Disused quarries. c .Chalk or gravel'-'d .An old lime kiln.    oa -   How to make a shelter  4  '  Materials boughs of evor-green or pine about four feet long eight poles about six feet long.and V  one inch in diameter. rr°  -lu ' . 'qv . . 0 . . Method of constructions Lay two poles on the ground i... about two feet apart cover wi &h-boughs then lay two moro poles on the top Tie-thesq at both ends and in the middle . Make another set as before. -Erect the two sides length ways to form an inverted ''V Lino the bottom with boughs to form a mattress covering can be made with rushes. straw bracken or heather -. In the day time tho shelter should be laid flat on the ground out-of sight  Food and water. u  a . How to find water.  S '  i. I ii. N iii. P iv. I when working oxen on irrigation waterwheel. Finding Food.  i. Catching birds by snares traps gins fish hooks otc ii. Catching rabbits by snares traps gins nets etc i.-L iii Where to find doer and how to stalk thorn.  Demonstrations for. i and ii .  c Finding Eggs  Watorhensr eggs..  Ey side of dykes ponds and in rushes-  Pheasants'-eggs In woods and hedgerows April to May How to toll when good to eat. The .bigger the clutch the more likely they arc  to be good. iii  English or grey partridges in hedgerows but dixfxcult to find as they are covered. French or Red Leg partridges. As for ii . Plovers'eggs. On rough land or pasture. How to tell when good to eat., X.9.  o  How to make a fire.  a .The best firo for boiling spit is the Gypsy fire which is made by standing up short thin pieces of wood in the shape of a ball tent. Ash oak birch fir gorse beech elm and thorn all kindle well but thorn gives off a strong scent which can be detected some distance away. In country where wood is unavailable dried cattle or horsb dung can be used.  To hang a kettle or billy-tin over the fire two crotch sticks and a cross stick are necessary. Always light fire if possible before daylight to avoid smoke being seen cooking can then be done by the cinders.  b Ovens.  A small trench about three feet long is useful. A good oven can be made from a four or five gallon tin provided it is water-tight. Clean out well and lay It on its side on bricks or large stones high enough to allow of a fire underneath Loavo the open end facing west make a chimney about two feet high at the other. Cover ovon with about a foot of clay or mud mixed with water to a stiff paste. Allow this to dry in the air for one day and light only a small fire under it on the next. This Hill finally dry it off. With an enamel plate or mess tin anything can be baked in this ovon.  7 Cooking.  a .How to mako bread. Mix water or milk to a stiff dough add a pinch of sa.lt and a spoonful of baking powder if available. Put in oven see.6 b and cook for one hour.  b .Partridges will take -pheasants a.nd ducks hours.  c .Hares and rabbits are rabbits and deer as soon as .possible after killing.  d .Chuppaties mix lb. to a stiff paste add a pinch of salt then roll out like a pancake. They should be cooked on an ember fire on a steel or enamel plate. Keep turning as f or pancakes they will take ten minutes to cook and are improved by a layer of jam.   -o0o', X. 10. REC OCTAISSAKCE SGI SiiE S 11 TO Jii. Rof.oronco Ma 0.8. ln . Duration 5 -6 hr Tljio'r 1500/1400 OBJECT.  0 e-i'70i or s i-udonts practice in making a reconnaissance of a town r 1. establishing thornsolvos in the town finding suioaolo ncadquirtors uoites-aux-lottros etc and a11crnacivos 8. Sabotage opportunities . 3. military police i R'.P etc. dispositions GENEFutL IDEA. Students are in German-occupied territory and have been sent to tno town to make a reconnaissance. SPsenL IDEA . 5ro givon detailed instructions' as to what information on thoir aaC iind of a rGP01' t is required from thorn   x return -i.o. irom the point of viow of establishing a courier organisation a sabotage organisation or a secret army.  ollov/ eci 7 instructors or P.S. personnel during a--inst in kent3 G lotner tt1 tako proper routine precautions informed °that th Tll\lTol ttr' °f C°UrSG' not lu some cases agents provocateurs may be introduced at the end oi the exercise when the students think it is all over. ADMINISTRATION. 1 Transport to and from the town. 2 Instructors or P.S. personnel for surveillance. 3 Agents provocateurs Period set aside for report-writing after the exercise., July 1944  X. 11. CAST  Organiser ... W/T Operator............j  Students.   Cut-out.  Adjoint .. j  o Hanriiman.. a o Student F.S.P. or  Officer.  Police............. Two F.S.Ps or F.S.P. and officer.  This exercise can be done by parties of three to five students  four is an ideal number . Where parties are larger than five the exercise should be split in two  STORY. For information of Duty Officer only.  W/T Operator whose transmission premises have been blown has managed to save his set and has left it at X Station cloakroom. All large stations are dangerous to Agents owing to controls he decides to report the situation to the Organiser.  W/'T Operator has a sched at his alternative premises at 1800 hours. The alternative premises are at Sway. This information is also known to the Organiser. Hote Alternative premises are represented by a truck parked 50 yards from Sway Station on the up side.  Purpose of the exercise is. that the Organiser when he is informed of the situation has to find seme safe way of getting the set to the Sway premises in time for the 1800 hrs. sched.  A Handiman known either to the Organiser or the Adjoint is available between 1600 and 1645 hours in the foyer of the Pavilion Bournemouth.  X c 1. Bournemouth Central Station cloakroom for exercises taking place at Boscombe.  2. Hants and Dorset Bus Station cloakroom Bournemouth for exercises taking place at Christchurch. NOTE When two exercises are run simultaneously Hinton Admiral can be used as the second alternative W/T premises. The 'truck will again he used as the safe house parked 50 yards from the up-side entrance.  BRIEFING.  GENERAL.  The Duty Officer will explain the set-up of the Organisation without naming the participants.  Ho will give the area' of the Organisation's work mentioning that the W/T Operator works at Bournemouth and the alternative premises are at Sway Hinton Admiral . He will point out that the premises are represented by a truck parked 50 yards from the station on the  up-side.  Ho will state that transmission ached for the day of the exercise  is 1800 hours.  He will show students maps of the area indicating the size ofrailwa stations i.e. Sway Hinton Admiral Christchurch Boscombe., He -will explain bus routes.  He will warn students that the railway station at Bournemouth and the Hants and Dorset Bus Station are controlled and that the Organiser must not risk his own organisation or himself by visiting these stations. He will indicate that the police at these two places are suspicious of his organisation.  He will give the time of the final train 1715 from Bournemouth mentioning that this stops at all stations to Brockenhurst.  He will give the time and place of the final R.V. Brockenhurst Station Lymington side 16300 hours .  He will warn students that they may not walk about in Broclcenhurst village and that they must wait at the final R.V. until collected.  He will instruct students not to discuss their individual briefs with each other.  individual.  ' Organiser  1 Ho will be told that he-is the Organiser  2 He will be told the identity of his Cut-out aid Adjoint .  3 He will be told the time s and place s of his R.V s with the above and warned to arrange safety precautions with the above before the exercise starts.  4 He will be given train and bus time table.  5 He will bo Hold the time and place of his R.V. with the Duty Officer for special briefing.  W/T Operator.  1. He will be told that he Is the W/T Operator. 2. He will be told the Identity of the Cut-Out. 3. Ho will be told the time and place of his R.V. with the above and warned to arrange safety precautions with him before the exercise starts. 4. He will be told the time and place of his R.V. with the Duty Officer for special briefing. Cut-Out.  1. He will be told that he is the Cut-Out. 2. He will be told the identity of the Organiser and the W/T Operator 3. He will be-told the timea and places of his R.Vs . with the above. Adjoint.  1. He will be told that he Is the Adjoint. 2. He will be told the identity of the Organiser. I, -3   3. He will be tolcl the time and place of his R.V. with the above. 4. Ho will be told tho time and place of his R.V with the Duty Officer for special briefing. Handiman.  He must be given simply his stance Pavilion Bournemouth the time he must be there 1600 -1645 hours and the fact that he has once or twice done jobs for a man answering to the Organiser s  or the Adjoint's description.  Police .  They must be given the description of the Handiman and must be told that he is suspected of being concerned with-black market or subversive activity. They will not be told his stance. They must be told to watch for him at train and bus stations between times to be laid down by Duty Officer. They must be given the description of the Organiser and the Adjoint.  Their orders are not to effect an arrest at once  but to endeavour t'o find s-  a  the present  b .the new safe be conveyed.  SPECIAL BRIEFING.  This will take place immediately before the first contacts  see under Suggested R.V s  Organiser without Adjoint .  When there is no adjoint available he will be told that there is a reliable handiman in the foyer of the.Pavilion Bournemouth between 1600 hours and 1645 hours together with a description of this man. He must be told that he has once or twice before hired this man under cover of an innocent mission.  Organiser with Ad joint .  When an Adjoint is available the Organiser will be told that the Adjoint knows of a reliable Handiman  who stands about 'from 1600 -1645 at the Pavilion that this place is dangerous for the Organiser to visit personally.  Adjoint.  He will be given the information as for Organiser   without Adjoint see above.  W/T Operator.  He must be told that his premises have been blown that his set has been conveyed by his guard to the cloakroom of X. The ticket for the suitcase is given to the W/T Operator by the Duty Officer at this point., The W/T Operator must be reminded of the necessity  of getting orders from the Organiser. This will require a further meeting with the Cut-out and sufficient time allowed for the Organiser to make his plan. The Duty Officer should ensure that the W/T Operator passes the ticket and information to the Cut-out and arranges a reasonable second  R.V. SUGGESTED R.V'S FOR BOSCOME AND  CHRISTCHURCH. Boscombe . Christchurch. Time. W/T -D.O. for special brief . In Arcade . Outside Woolworths 1435. W/T -Cut-Out Outside St Outside 1450 . John the G.P.O. Evangelist Church.  Org.-D.O. for special In News room Inside 1500 brief . of Public Christchurch Library. Priory.  Cut-Out. -Org. In News Inside 1515 room of Christchurch Public Priory.  'Library.  Adjoint -D.O for Outside Outside King's special brief Woolworths Arms Hotel. 1445  Org. -Adjoint. Outside Outside King's 1545 .Woolworths Arms Hotel.  Note This allows the Duty Officer time to' hear the Organiser's orders. He should always endeavour to check these before the Cut-Out. transmits them to the W/T Operator.  ADMINISTRATION  Students and Handiman go by truck to Christchurch or Boscombe leaving at 13.15 hours. Handiman continues to Bournemouth. Police go by train direct to Bournemouth from Brockenhurst Station. The bag is taken by an F.S.P. to the cloakroom on the day prior to the exercise and the ticket handed to the Duty-Offleer prior to-the commencement of the exercise.  Students must be told to be at the final R.V. at time stated and must be. given the time of the last train from Bournemouth Boscombe and Christchurch which will get them to the final R.V. at the right time. This train is the 17 15 hours train 1720 -Boscombe 1729 -Christchurch . Students must understand that this is the latest train they can catch. Should any student use the 1545 train from Bournemouth to Brockenhurst he will be taken straight back to Beaulieu in the truck and not allowed to walk about in Brockenhurst village., For train times see attached time-table This should he verified before departure.  SCHOOL SOLUTION.  The Organiser having heard the situation of his W/T Operator gives the following orders s-   The Cut-out and the W/T Operator to take the  1720 1729 train to Sway Station travelling  separately and the Cut-out to meet the Handiman  outside Sway station in order to collect the bag while the W/T Operator goes straight to  the alternative premises. Thus the Handiman will not know where the Safe House is located.  The Adjoint or where no Adjoint the Organiser to  go to Bournemouth by any other means than the  train interview the Handiman and follow him as  far as the Station then return by any other means than the train to Boscombe or Christchurch  catch the 1729 train from there to the final R.V.  The Organiser tak.es the 1720 train from Christchurch to Brockenhurst. No members of the orgai isation will recognise each other on this train.  Note The W/T Operator the Cut-Out and the Handiman  proceed in the truck with the Duty Officer from  Sway Hinton Admiral to Brockenhurst where they wi11 meet the remainder of the Organisation.  TRAIN TILES  1325 1419 1429 1433 Southampton Central Christchurch. Boscombe. Bournemouth.  Organisation and Handiman  Organisation  Organisation  Handiman . Fj-nal Train 1715 1720 17291756 Bournemouth Central. Boscombe. Christchurch. Brockenhurst. Other Trains .  1554 Bournemouth Central. 1559 Boscombe. 1607 Christchurch. 1634 Brockenhur&t  The above trains are running at present but Duty Officers should check them before departure., EXERCISE X. 12 a and X.12 b . OBJECT. To practise planning and giving orders for a Reception Committee. OPENING NARRATIVE. Ref .Map. O.S. 1 to 1 mile New Forest 83.24. Committee . Organiser from England. Second i/c -a farmer. Living at student's house. The organiser's temporary cover is -that he is staying with the farmer for his health and to help on the farm. Ea is really there to train the farmer in Recaption Committee wort.  A. a grocer . ALL LIVING IN B. a paper and book-shop keeper. AND AROUND C. a butcher BEAULIEU D. C's brother VILLAGE. E. a doctor  F. a cure. All have bicycles and the Doctor has -a car as well. All have wireless receiving sets. None except the organiser has done Reception Committee work before. They all know each other except -the organiser who knows only the farmer and the doctor. They all know the area fairly well. SITUATION The Organiser has arranged with London to receive four con tainers and one new agent as assistant to himself. On the day chosen by London for the dropping a message will be sent on the B.B.C. at 1200 hours - Pierre a perdu son canif . The light signal from the ground to the air is the letter Q no reply from the aircraft. Stand-by time -. 2200 -0100 G.M.T. Password to be given by the agent who will be dropped Une belle nuit pour une promenade Reply by Organiser Oui si I'on a le transport . ADDITIONAL DETAILS  a Transport. The farmer has made an arrangement with the owner of a transport business at Southampton for two 750 kilo trucks with a reliable driver.for each. The drivers' cover is carrying vegetables from Southampton to Lymington and the trucks will be half full. They have proper permits to drive at night. Thera is a warehouse at Lymington where containers can be hidden., The farmer can supply one horse cart and one 2-wheel harrow if required.  b Arms. iiach member of the Committee has his own pistol and ammunition and in addition there is a cache of 12 sten guns and ample ammunition and also hand grenades at the Cure's house. fc Torches. 12 hand torches in the farm.  d- Enemy. There is a German post at Hythe consisting of 1 officer and 9 men second line troops. No patrols likely.   e Curfew. There is a curfew from 2300 -0500 hours. QUESTIONS. 1. Divide class into groups if possible each contain ing 1 student who has done the course at S.T.S. 40 or S.T.S. 51. 2. Each Group will prepare answers tp the following questio  fa As organiser how will you collect all the members of the Committee together to give them orders and hove will you inform the owner-of the transport as to where he is to send his lorries and how the drivers are to be recognised fb Each group will prepare detailed orders for the co mmittee. -oOo, jgTAHDBSTnTE TRAINING.  Fu\p .Rof . 0.8 l'1 Ucw i ox oat. Duration He c on.ua Isa an c e 6 u ill S.7. 1 Exercise 1- -.  2 hrs. 1 OBJECT. To civo students practice In oz G-.nisiiT trainin'' for recruits In aaero67 . 2 LESSORS TO BE LE. KITT . a. Inconspicuous approach to rendezvous and retreat o. e over s tor7 and action on being surprised c. Giving orders lor assembly without revealing actual place of instruction. 3 GENERAL IDEA . Students are asked to imagino that they are in thoir own country Thoir training at their school should bo regarded c s 01ju.LvuIo.al 00 a cover job in the place whoro they arc goinp to oorL. The Duty Officor is their employer who knows Wiiau their subversive activity is. 4 . SPECIAL IDEA . Students arc informed that a group of Loyalists arc living in lux lieu Diedon etc. and that they require weapon and/or aomolition-training for guerrilla.warfare . The leader of the 01 v y.-iii .5cxo .\ -'ic.r ulc od upon 0 s'ui fcc.l l0 plfico for tilO instructioi1.. The Loyalists do not knov/ where the place is ana have never seen the students Atphc conclusion of the recce the students should make a plan lor the organisation of the instruction and give detailed oraors for the Loyalists including cover for approach safety signals passwords etc. 5.. pNIITISTIUTION . Accessary weapons and ammunition and/or demolition kit Ti.ie Duty Officer or an officer-student detailed by him must bo responsible for safety in handling of  .. g U.aiLion ..iUi ueyolition kit. In general only two rounds ox ..m .unition should be .provided and students instructed una u tac.y mus c on no account bo loaded into-the broach dur n 11 instruction. ' ' 0 T.ruck or utility if necessary. 6. BTTER-COlEXTj.fICATION. Conu.ct will do established by the Loyalists and the students  °3 oans ox y cut-out Thir cut-out will reveal himself oy tno use ox a password. The cut-out may bo the Dutv Officer 'himself or .n E.S.F, X. 14. MILIT-i RY IITTE HiIGE ''TC S R -CO 1 EISS ' P2 .. ISrciseV Ref-srenoe ilag o.S i Duration. Race 2 hr3 Report-writ In 1 hr Time 1400 hrs. OBJECT. To uraxn s tuho-nta in odsc.rvat ion  and roporting on things of xac-crust to a military oomaxaacior preparing-for an invasion.  CTTRER.. L Tim . hn la-ncl is about to be invaded by the Germans and students arc  Q-erman agents already ost.-.blishod here. SPECIAL XDaiiil  J '' urrfR °i7 c-r or bicycle on a route chosen by  the instructor. On their return they arc required to produce uc.o ana report showing everything they have scon durinAhe COrIs c -wa ild of interest to a Goman . Ij-I-lb .- y co iiu a.ndfr r ayouo to invade England ADalRISTRhTiqT Car true or bicycles  Period sot aside' f0r r0portwr±t in '. NOTE .  It is a good thing to  .r.'-v-ngv that where a car or truck must bo  used about ono hour s walking is incorporated into the exorcise., X. 15. . THE USE OF A CUT-OUT. 1. OBJECTS.  a To give practice in construction and maintenance of an alibi . ....  b The u'se of safety signals in the interior of premises.  The absence of an exter ior safety signal would result in the students avoiding the the house and therefore the scheme could not take place.  o To give practice in passing written messages.  d To give practice in arranging innocent conversations concealing clandestine verbal messages. 2. NARRATIVE. To be read out' to students. A subversive organisation exists in the area. The organiser is anonymous but a local professional man i.e. doctor lawyer house-agent etc. is working under his own legal cover as a cut-out between the organiser and his .informant service. Several days ago the organiser told his cut-out that he required certain information. The cut-out passed on the de tails of the information required to the various members of the informant service in the form of questions to which they had to find the answers. Having now obtained that information on the day of the exercise the informants bring it to the cut-out at his business premises under cover of an innocent visit on business matters. They also bring him a written cipher message. It' is assumed that the visitors and the cut-out are al ready known to each other. If there is no safety signal being shown in the cut-out s office when they arrive the information will be passed in prearranged veiled language and the written message passed over secretly.  N B. Unknown to the students the cut-out's premises are raided by the police and under pressure he will be forced to continue to receive his clients. Note -Instructors must point out to students that the baciiground of the exercise is necessarily father artificial. Thera would normally be an exterior safety signal not an interior one and aks-o it is most improbable that anyone would try and pass either a written message or a verbal message in veiled language if the safety signal was not showing. The lesson being taught can not always fit in with the local situation assumed in the exercise 3. INSTRUCTION TO DUTY OFFIClREL   i General.  a In order to add realism to the exercise the students should be given a fictitious name address and occu pation e.g. Professional man working as cut-out might be M. Dupont or Herr Schmidt Herr Olsen etc. a lawyer living at S.T.S. . suitably renamed to re present a country house irTThe student's own country., Xo 15.  b During the exercise fication papers are carried for reasons of local security the Duty Officer must inform the police that they are to ignore them when searching the students. f  ii Selection of Personnel. Duty'Officers should choose roles identities coveroccupations etc. for s'tucents-according to their respect ive character and abilities. The personnel required are as follows One cut-out wording under his own legal cover  preferably a''Student who possesses some professional qualification i.e. doctor lawyer dentist architect etc. Visiting clients i.e. the members.of the informant service'  six is about' the maximum that time will permit. One or two visiting clients as. police informers  these are not essential but do improve the exercise ' Two or three instructors or F.3.P. are needed as police 4. BRIEFING.  i General. The objects of the exercise and the narrative should be given to all the students together. Each student must then be briefed individually and.must under-no circumstances divulge the details of his briefing to any other student.  ii Cut-out. He must be told - .  a Location and name of. the house In which he is towork. .. -  b Eis cover name and profession for the exercise.  c What specific question or questions each-in formant'is bringing the answer to. N.B. Simple and precise questions should be chosen.  d Time at which he is to arrive at the house on the day of the exercise.  s That he must interview each visitor individually before the exercise and arrange with him the following details - Under what alibi the informant will visit him. -What the nature of their cover conversation will be ., 1. 15. 3  -Safety signal. ' . -By Yihat secret means the written message will be passed if the safety signal is not showing plus a signal to indicate that it has' bken passed . -What form the veiled language conversation will take if this is necessary owing to no safety signal. N.B. The Duty Officer should hot present this on a plate to the student. He should remind him of ail the points in sub-para ii e above by putting questions to him though he must ensure that the student bears in mind all the above 5 points or otherwise the whole exercise will be prejudiced.  iii Visiting Students. Informants Each must be told -'  a That he is a member of the informant service.  b His cover name and profession.  c . Location name and profession of the cut-out.  d Time he is to arrive at the out-out's house on the day of the exercise.  e The question he is bringing the answer to and the answer itself. N.B. It must be impressed on him. that ho must NOT tell thvj cut-out what the answer is before the exercise.  f That he and thu cut-out must mutually arrango all details as in sub-para iife above before the exercise.  g What he is to do after the termination of his visit e.g. stay in the .grounds of the house return to own house etc. This is necessary in order to have students available for .a discussion after the exercise.  iv Additional personnel. If desired one or two students or instructors can be used as Gestapo informers. The cut-out should be told during his briefing that they are merely innocent people visiting him on real business included in the exercise to add realism to it and that he has no need to arrange any conventions with them. Their role will be -to arrive at the house at a given time with some business reason for their visit. While they are in the house they will try and note anything that can connect the inmates or visitors with subversive activity. and report what they see later during the discussion e.g.' People. In waiting room hiding messages practising veiled language etc. They may if necessary be arrested by the police in order hot to arouse the cut out's suspicions of their true role but should bo re leased as soon as they are away from the office., \ / X. 15.  v Police. They must bo told   a That tho local professioaal man living at is a person suspected of using his profession as a cover for resistance activity and that among his clientele are members of a resistance movement.  b Time to arrive at the housb where the exercise is taking place. This should be about 10 minutes before the commencement of exercise. They should conceal themselves in the house where they can see and hear tho conversations of tho cut-out and his clients without themselves' being seen.  c .bach visitor should be arrested as ho is lenving tho house after his visit searched and subjected to a short interrogations -  d After say the second visitor has left they shoul break in on the cut-out and subject him to a short interrogation ahd even search finishing by instruct ing him to receive his clients normally -while they  the police will bo keeping him under'observation.  e The identities so that they need not arrest them as they leave. In the case of these two types of visitor they can if they wish break in bn the cut-out in the middle of the conversation and arrest the client and take him away. This must NOT be done with informants however since it prevents the students from passing their written message and completing their innocent verbal conversation and thus tends to discourage them. They should be arrested as they are leaving the house.  f When searching students they must ignore the question of military identification papers.  g After the last visitor has left and been arrested they should re-intorrogate some of tho visitors in front of the cut-out and vice versa so that each may see how the alibi for the visit stands the strain. 5. ADMINISTRATION. Duty Officer must   a Advise House Commandant as to what materials will be required in the room and by what time..  b Request House Commandant to make one of the house staff available to receive visitors and shove them to the waiting-room or directly into the cut-out's office.  c Arrive at the house with the police to make his final arrangements and conceal himself where he can hear the proceedings .  d Warn students that should they see him tho O.C. C.I. or A.C.I. during the exercise they will ignore thorn completely. -o0o, X.16 . W/T EXERGIS3 - Six students.  OBJECT.  To practise WX students in security details of W/T trans mission. L-   IESSOXS. /  1. Danger signs at house when operator transmit. 2. Choice of hiding places for set at place of transmission. 3.  Posting of guards during transmission. 4. System of warning signals. 5 Plans for emergency.  CAST.  A. W/T Operator. B. Owner of house where transmission takes place. C. A's subordinates available as guards.   D. X. Two-policemen. Specialists .  Y. GEI'ERAL IDEA  England is occupied by Germans.  'A' is a W/T Operator working in the area Southampton   Beaulieu -Brockenhurst. ..One of his places of transmission is S.T.S. -- SPECIAL IDEA.  /  On 'A has a ached at Z hours and.has decided to use S'.TVS.-for the transmission. His set is already there. Before the time of sched he has arranged for two guards to be posted warning signs in case of danger and plans for emergoncy.  NARRATIVE .   --   Before Zero hour. A gives orders to. his two guards. rVTST- A arrives at S.T.S. and enters provided safe signal Ts given  z. Start of transmission. Z 4 5 . Police enter house. Carry out search and interrogation on the spot of occupants.  NOTES FOR DUTY OFFICER  1. Exercise must be made as realistic as possible by the provision of adequate substitutes for W/T set operator's plan etc. It is suggested that operator be given a Buzzer set up in a suitcase a coded message to transmit a phoney plan and other coded writings., X 16  2 W/T Operator should be briefed In good time so that think out his plans. It would do no harm to brief him in tho hearing of tho other students. Ho has to arrange before the start of the exorcise  1. Danger signal at the house with B. 2. How guards will be disposed. 3. How guards will give warning signals and in what circumstances. /  4. What ho-will do a with his sot  b with himsolf in case of emergency. 3 It should bo explained to the students that a certain truck or bicycle whatever is available will represent enemy D.P-ing van.  4 Police who will arrive in the above-mentioned truck can bo represented by Duty Officer and one F .3 .P. It does not matter if they are both known to the students.  5 The whole exorcise should not take more than half an hour. It could well bo done twice in an afternoon especially if the first time is too successful from tho police point of view.  6 The remainder of the afternoon can be. devoted to discussion.  '-o0o--  t i, Y. INDOOR EXBRCISISs r Y. 1. Descriptions and Identity Parade. fa Giving description. fb Identifying a man from A given description. Y. 2. Observation Exercise. Y. 3. Approaching and Recruiting. Y. 4. Contacting Exercise. Y. 5. Body Searches. Y. 6. Simple Disguises. Y. 7. Spare Y. 8. Spare Y. 9. Interrogation. Final Exercise. 96 hours Scheme -oOo , Y. 1. July 1942. DESCRIPTIONS.  To be given in conjunction with. Identity Parade.  1 GENERAL. It is important that an agent should he able to a .   easily recognised by a ''bird party. b . c .   or without that person realisin' that he is giving  information. As moat people are vague and inaccurate about description . agents should be given instruction.  2. POLICE METHODS.. The police have methods which include recording finger prints measuring limbs taking photographs etc. These are impracticable for other people. However a simpler and more satisfactory method can be devised.  3. SIMPLE METHOD. Describe  Recognise  Extract  prejudiced by actual knowledge of real age.  c . Give height measuring it against your own. If a woman state whether or net high heels were worn.  d . Give at least two other outstanding features not clothes . If they are features which could be altered more should be given. Do not mentic normalities they only cause con usion.  e . If time permits notice subject's peculiarities of manner speech etc. They should be given in addition to the above.  f . Clothes may be misleading. The way they are worn is sometimes of greater value.  g .Give seen e.g. .sitting down right profile only.  'V  h .Give  4. When giving a description mexr rise the different points to be looked for. Imagine the subject t. oe walking tow'ards and then passing you. Both front and side view start at head and work downwards. 5. To recognise a person by description do not form a mental picture of subject beforehand. Eliminate possibilities one by one on the height age principle not bothering about other details until later.  N.B. When people are on the move all the principles of description will bo applied more or less simultaneously. -oOo-  a . Recognition from description is a process of elimination b ..   Give apparent age of subject not real age . Do not be,  H EXERdlSE -Y.l.  DESCRIPTIONS ITO xDYj'I'I'ITY IaIIADYS.  OPj ect To utilise the knowleCge aPTorded Dy lecture on ''Descriptions .  a DESCRIBING-A MllU  In this exercise a living model will he placed in front of the class or photographs v/ill he thrown on the screen by the epidiascope. Students will he asked to recognise and name salient features and afterwards to write down descriptions of the individual or photograph. They may also he asked to identify a man's photograph from a description.  h . IDENTITY PARADE.  i-. Students will he given the description of a man preferably not more than lour salient features two of which should normally he his height and apparent age. Students will then pracoed one at a time to an identification parade consisting of as many men as possible and will be given thirty seconds in which to identify the man.  ii . Each Student will stand beside a door or gate and a parade of men will come out one by one. Here again Students will have to identify the man from the description in their possession.  iii . In the descriptions given in i and ii' one strong salient feature can he omitted by way of change and the Students warned of this before hand and-asked to state after they have found their man what is the feature omitted.  -0O0   f  s  \  \, EXERCISE-1 2  OBSERVATION fcRCISES.  Object  To develop and train the powers of observation and mamory on the part of the Students  a  Kim s Game  The Instructor places about 15 or 20 different articles on a tray or table e.g. two or three different kinds of buttons pencil cork stones knife or anything else handy. Then covers them up with a cloth. Make a list of the articles and put columns opposite these for each of the students' replies. Then uncover the articles for a minute look them over again taking each student separately and getting him to repeat as many of the articles as he can remember marking off each item against his name on the sheet.  Variations.  i . Change position of objects on the. tray so that the student has to memorise those changes of position as well as the actual objects.  ii . Students to memorise the objects In groups such as articles of stationery etc.  ill . Incongruities might be introduced e.g a pipe with an unused bowl yot a well bitten stem. Match box containing wrong typo of matches. An ink bottle marked 'blue ink1 containing red.  b .Examining an object and writing  This exercise is similar to a except that a single and more complicated object is used such as a photograph or picture depicting some activity. Students should be asked to give a full description of everything seen position of persons in a.picture what they are doing ' clothes etc.  Objects suitable for this exercise might Include photographs and pictures of activity drawings etc of uniforms e.g foreign police labour corps etc. Different types of civilian clothing a front page of a newspaper etc etc., c .  a .  f .  Ilemorising a newspaper In a short time.  Imagining that tho student is a person who has been left alone in an army or police office for a period of a minuto or so tho student should study a document and memorise the essential points. Documents giving lists  of names instructions or details of stores equipment  etc. details of a new identity or ration card to be  introduced shortly might be used.  I.Iomorising a map.  It is essential to use only a portion of a map which  shows a few salient points rather than a large and  complicated picture. For instance a portion of a  large-scale map of this district showing the towns of  Southampton Lyndhurst Brockenhurst Lymington etc. is a good example.  Variation.  Memorising a route between two fairly distant points a.fter a short study of the map. . The journey to be undertaken later.  Identifying Objects by touch.  In this case the Students must be blindfolded. They can  either name the objqcts in turn as they touch them or memorise them all at the end of the exercise.  This exercise can include articles that might be required for night operations i.c. ammunition plastic detonators adhesive tape different types of fuses.  Identifying objects by smell.  Similar to above using articles recognizable only by  smell e.g. tobacco vinegar paraffin ink bdot-polis fc  brasso etc.  Idcntif7/ing Sounds.  There are two forms of thiss   a .Identifying linos of a B.B.C. Broadcast e.g a windo w opening or shutting man In boots gym. shoes wellingtons walking on gravel etc etc  b .Identifying which a sound e.g ticking of a watch proceeds., Objects i . Contacting a person iron a description. ii . Approaching lain v-ith a view to recruitment iii . Readiness in handling surprise and awkward develop'C nt. It is desirable that the person to bo contacted should bo previously unknown to the student and should be picked up by description.  The situation is that England has been success fully invaded and that this is one of the occupied areas which the student is endeavouring to ''organise''. The person has been rocanmondod as trustworthy nevertheless the recruiter has to ascertain his views and possible reactions before making any proposition.  In the middle of the conversation a third person enters recognises the recruitor and asks him a series of awkward questions regarding his recent movements and activitios etc., Y 4  COITTYCTIHG 2XSRCISE KiSSIRGISSGaGES'WTPUBLIC.H iCS .  Duration 1 -2 hrs. T.lmo Evening.  OBJECT .  To give students practice in  1. Entering into conversation with a strangor in a natura1 manner 2. Giving a password to that person and receiving tho answer in a natural manner. 3. Passing a moasago either verbal or written without oxciting 'the suspicion of those round about. GENERAL IDEA.  Students arc inombors of a subversive organisation a.nd have messages to pass -either amongst thornsoIves or to an Instructor.  SPECIAL IDEj  Students all assemble in their moss-room and one' end of tho  room is fitted out as'a bar. Tho students are in groups of  three or four at tables.  Two students go out and agree on a password One of them is  given a written and/or verbal message to pass to the other.  The first student then comes In and sits down in tho herLater the second student follows gets into conversation with him gives the password and passes tho message.  All tho other students are then asked to sag what tho password was and how the mossago was passed. If it was. a verbal messqgo tho students try to give tho substance of tho message.  If they have a. verbal message to Impart the two students must  agroo on some natural signal to Indicate the beginning ando nd  of tho message so that the substance of the communication  is woven into.an apparently normal conversation.  Tho Duty Officer must of course only give the message to one of the two students and the tost of the success or otherwise of the students 1 efforts will bo whether or not the substance of the. message was correctly received by tho other1 student.  Tho exercise may alternatively be carried out in an actual bar or cafo. This has tho advantage that it will tost the students' reactions in a crowded public placej but there is no possibility of having more than throe or four students studentsstudents pro jont or of discussion on each individual effort until lator.  .iDlJINISTRAIIO' '  Instructor or I'.S.P. to act as barman., , -bulky objects will certainly be found. -compromising objects carried openly in the pockets may be noticed e.g. two identity cards too many ration coupons papers which are contradictory or otherwise not in order objects showing anti-German or anti-Quisling sympathies. fc Rigorous body search done by experts . Usually only undertaken in the case of definite suspicion most often after arrest. Uome or all of the following methods may be used and if the searchers know their job have the necessary facilities and are determined to find anything incriminating it is un likely that anything will escape them but  -Searching is a tedious job and searchers are often careless lazy or inefficient. -Native police are sometimes sympathetic and will overlook things especially if the object is so well hidden aS to justify the oversight if this is discovered later. Consequently this type of search is rarely carried out in all its rigour except in serious cases of espionage. Methods  i Suspect may be taicen unawares by sudden arrest or by pretending that routine search is taking place. fii On the way to the police-station the suspect may apparently be given an opportunity to destroy or jettison anything but in reality he will .be closely watched in the hope he will attempt this. fiii Suspect will be allowed neither to see nor speak to friends nor to leave anything behind nor to eat drink smoke nor go to the W.C. f iv Suspect may he tries to be left ostensibly alone to seu destroy or dispose of -anything. if  v Search usually carried out in bare room with two tables well separated. Objects which are to be searched are placed on one table and transferred to the other when the searcher is satisfied there is nothing of interest in it.  vi Suspect usually placed against the wall well away from the tables with his hands up. He may be placed with his back to the wall in which case he is kept under observation throughout the search to note reactions e.g . relief or anxiety. Alternatively particularly if the searchers are not numerous he may be made to stand facing the the wail hands up and pressed against it and feet well apart so that he cannot make any sudden movement. fvii Pockets emptied and contents searched. Then suspect stripped and clouthes searched. fviii Suspect's body examined. Hair combed while he leans over table orifices examined scars examined made to lean over table and cough. In doubtful cases doctor or dentist used. Purgative may be, .0 3 administered. Suspects have been known to be X-rayed ..V. . -r k. ' . fix Ownership of baggage etc established. It may or may not be searched in suspect's presence.  -i . fx In cases where serious espionage or subversion is suspected ciothes may be chemically tested for impregnation with secret inks and dusi and fluff may be extracted by vacuum-cleaner fob expert ana lysis.  xi Suspeci usually not interrogated until after search b'Ut police may try to trick. hltUiilhto indiscreet o1 remarks by casual conversation-.  fxii Suspect once .searched not allowed' to' regain contact vvith unsearchedpersons vaitlioUgh he may be put in aj cell with stool-pigeons.. Sr He tody be secretly watched for some time. Counter Measures'. . A. Advance precautions. ' fi Never carry inoriminating.i.msteria 1 except when it cannot.be avoided. fii Check'contents of pockets and clothes regularly. fCf. /\4 fii i Do nothing to attract attention by wearing or carrying something conspicuous or by furtive behaviour .  Cf. A.4 A.8 9 10. fiv Decide whether or not you can hide the object so thoroughly that only a very severe search will find it. If you cannot as in the case of large objects then it must joe camouflaged e.g. wireless set as vacuum 'Gleaner massage apparatus etc. plastic shaped like butter .and carried with groceries etc. In this case consider the possibility of employing a handyman decoy or a scout. Cf. A. 8 9 10.  . rj . .V ' y'. Uo'o - .'.jl -. .-.il  v If it is a small object that can be hidden decide in advance between two.alternatives a That you Rill carry t.h e article 'somewhere accessible so that you can get rid of it e.g. by eating dropping or planting on someone else if in danger of being searched. This is probably ' the best for mes.sage.s unless you5 expect to pass through a superficial control. Possibility of using edible or soluble paper for messages but dangerous if found.  b Alternatively that -you will hide the article so thoroughly that it will escape anything but a stringent search. B. Hiding small objects. The following points should be considered  i Use silk paper or cloth for messages to avoid rustling.  ii Use dummy padding to give clothing similar appearance and feel in corresponding places e.g. if message or object is hidden in one lapel put object of same texture and thickness in opposite lapel so that if,  4 thtiy are felt together they feel a like anh the padding appears to be an integral part of the garment.  iii For sewing things in clothing use the right sort of thread and have the stitching done by an expert so that it all looks alike.. fiv Remember all possible hiding places have been used though no one searcher is likely to know them all. Try to choose one that is as difficult to get at as possible. e.g. by mixing article with any thing of which you have a quantity e.g. tobacco shreds   v  Generally speaking shoes or boots are very thoroughly probed and searched and consequently should be avoided 0. Counter-measures during search.  i Agent should the search e.g. black market and act accordingly.  ii Agent's attitude  e.g. Indignation resignation indifference nervousness .  iii Agent should moments or relief when they are passed. His reactions will probably be watched though this may no t be apparent.  iv Judge the atmosphere of the search. If the searchers are careless or indifferent e.g. if they let the suspect empty his own pockets or take his own clothes off himself the agent should be ready to take advantage of this at the right moment e.g. by withholding compromising article and slipping it later among articles already searched.  v It may be possible to put the police on the wrong scent by letting them find some non-subversive but incriminating or' discreditable article e.g. small amount of illegal currency or food obscene photo graph or poem etc.  vi If apparently left alone or placed in cell with other people beware traps . -0O0, Y. 5. CLOTHiiS SEARCH Duration 1-2 hours. Ob j Qc t. fa To train students to conceal small objects or  papers about their persons. fb To give practice in methodical body-s arching . This exercise takes place after the lecture on personal searches . 1. If time permits make one student empty his pockets and show how informative the contents can be 2. Divide the class into teams of 3 or 4 students 3. In each team nominate a police chief and a s us pact. The rest are ordinary police. 4. Give the suspects a number of small objects and messages to hide in their clothes or on their persons. 5. The suspects should then approach the house from outside be stopped by the police just outside and given a routine search of the severer typ . 6. They should then be taken to the lecture room and searched thoroughly a time limit being set according to the time available. 7. After the first control suspects should be free to throw away anything if they get the chance 8. If there are several teams competition can be introduced by letting each team help its suspect to hide things and then hava him searched by another team. 9. Alternatively a narrative can be introduced e.g. a certain man or men In the district are suspected of clandestine activity. In particular he/they are known to make un explained journeys to the next town and it is thought he/they form part of a courier line. He/they can usually be found going home from work at a given time. The police have orders to arrest and search him/them. If desired one man can be innocent so as to occupy and distract the police attention 10 Students should be given small messages dummy detonators slow matches silk maps cipher silks etc to hide 11 Where there is a big party of students a body search can be introduced into an X. 15 12 Summary searches may be introduced into other exercises where appropriate e.g. on the return from the burglary  X. 3b. or during interrogation fY. 9. . -oOo, DISGUISE.  GENERAL.  By the term disguise we mean the whole range of alterations to features and clothes which assist the agent to move unnoticed or unrecognised about his work. It should not be thought that a complete disguise which will pass the closest scrutiny is possible unless a facial operation has been performed prior to departure. This would be long-term disguise and combined with hair dye can prove 100 effective. In this lecture we are considering only disguise as it can be assumed in the field.  Disguise is a valuable aid to security but can also be extremely dangerous. It must not be forgotten that there can be no cover story for a man who is found to be making use of disguise  SECURITYmDIGIPIES .   a .Disguise involving a change of name profession or social class must be accompanied by perfect alibi papers and knowledge of the subject. Therefore the agent is advised to choose a disguise which he knows well i.e a previous profession.  b .The agent must have a plausible explanation articles required for his disguise i.e. clothes belong to a friend whose house has been bombed.  c .The agent should if possible keep his house where he can always get it in an emergency i.o an apartment which he will only use if he is 'blown1  d .Speed in assuming disguise Is often essential. the agent must know exactly what he is going to do and practice it before-hand.  e .An effective disguise is built up from details carefully thought .out and interrelated. Clothes state of body facial features hands must all agree with cover story.  f .Disguise of the face will rarely stand search and should not bo employed where there is danger of this. Risks can naturally be run in cases of emorgoncy such as escape.  g .Disguise if it is observed will cause It should not bo used therefore where the agent is well known or is an object of curiosity i.e. a village or smal 1 town. OCCASIONS FOR SMPLOYMEITT.  Before using a disguise the following questions must bo answered   a .Do I want to bluff  b .Do I want to evado  c .Do I want to mislead before  a is more likoly to bo due to good fortune than to.artifice but there is a reasonable chanco of such a bluff working if the agent makes a radical altoration in style and colour of clothes and is not seen in his familiar surroundings i.o. wears sports clothes instead of a dark lounge suit'and bicycles along the canals instead of walking along the streets., 2    b .In thlfl case the agent must endeavour as are likely to-be used in his recognition.  c .In such cases the agent does not require disguise. He v/ill endeavour to croato some outstanding feature - habit dress or facial feature -which will bo noticed by his contact and which would in consequence be alluded to In casual conversation about him or a description given of him i.e. spectacles scar workman s clothes or nervous twitch. Bearing the above questions in mind hero are a few occasions for which disguise can be Used. The agent however must always bear in mind the pros and cons of its employment.  i. Escape. Disguise is useful and often essential for any form of escape either in case of extreme danger i.o. when the agent Is blown or has escaped from prison or when circumstances make It advisable for him to go to ground  i.e. when part of his organisation has been blown or he himself or his contacts aro under surveillance. He may also require it for his return to this country or to pass through the Allied linos i.o local peasant. For this purpose the agent will require a very complete disguise involving a change of profession clothes facial appearance etc. The agent is therefore advised to provide himself with such an emergency disguise at an early opportunity after his arrival in the field. Even if ho has no reason to assume it the possession of such an additional measure of security will give him greater confidence.  ii. Organiser. Disguise may bo useful to help an organiser whose work entails meeting with heads of various services in different places. Thus a series of offices or flats  . may be used for interviews and a different disguise employed for each. Such a disguise need not be complete All that is required is sufficient to cause a false description to be given of him.  iii. Organiser of Reception Where the agent is required to be known to members of local committees or whose work involves travelling from ground to ground when operations are expected. It is also valuable for supervision of an organisation's work without giving away the identity of the organiser.  Iv. Sabotage Instructor.  An instructor s habits speech and appearance aro bound to be remarked by students. A false description is therefore necessary.  v. Surveillance of a person or house. Whore his own cover would cause attention to be drawn to him. It is also useful in order to check-up on an individual prior to recruiting him.  vi. Wire oo s Oporator. In towns when work involves transmission from same house on consecutive occasions. Camouflage rather than, Y.6  -o   disguise should bo used i.o constant variety of clothos.  HINTS Oil APPLICATION.  CLOTHES.  Tho most important items of disguise. The police must know social class or profossion of a suspoct. Thoroforo the agent must try to find clothes which chango those. Good cover must be arranged for possession of thorn. Other than profossipnal clothes such as -waiter workman peasant priest business man tho agent should try to obtain clothes which change his figure and appearance for variation. A good uso of clothes is for tho agont to wear one typo of suit normally and to change this for a suit of completely different stylo and colour for special mootings or in an omorgoncy.  i. Figure Gan be changed by a too long cap or berot b .  double breasted coat single breasted coat  trousers too short narrow trousers soft hat  ii. Appearance . Can be changed by difforont colours in suits jersey or  wind-jammer ' knee brooches  hats overcoat mackintosh  otc .  MIR.  You should grow your hair longer than normal the appoaranco and shape of head can be drastically altered by cutting or oven shaving tho hair completely. This Is a  valuable emergency disguise.  i. To make dark hair grey. Proparations -Max Factor hair whitoner or white 'Blanco'.  Lothods of use for all tho above -pour into saucer  and with small tob'ulf1JrusK aYjply to tho hair kooping  tho mixture away from tho skin. Lot it dry and as it  dries It will grey the hair. If only tho sides of tho  hair aro done it will give tho best effect.  ii Tomake dar& ha.ir gofair.  Proparations -Peroxide bought In small bottles 20 volume.  Method of Qso -wash tho hair In tho poroxido undiluted. One rTns'o will Tighton but not bleach tho hair. Continued application will result in very fair hair. Necessity for continuing tho treatment as the hair grows.  T° fair or white hair go darker.  Preparations -Black charcoal powder  Method jef Uso -Apply powder to hair with brush rub in wrtlaTTEo Tllagors comb and brush. Continue this until the colour is satisfactory., Y.6 V  4-   FOREIfflAD.  Nothing can be done to change the shape of this except bywearing head gear.  EYEBROWS.  These can be either bleached or darkened in the same manner as for the hair or plucked in order to alter the expression.  Accessories Tweezers and oily substance.  Method of Use -If thick they can be cut and if needed plucked.  If plucked apply a little talcum powder to take away the redness. Apply a little oil to smooth them down.  If eyebrows meet shave above the nose and apply talcum powder. Plucking half the eyebrows will alter the expressil i.e giving them an upward or downward tilt.  If thin and sleek with the aid of a brown and black pencil and by following the natural growth of the hair pencil in lines and then smooth with finger . Then comb the eyebrows against their natural growth which will help to hide the pencil mark and give a rugged effect.   Biassos . Several types of mounts should be tried to see which produces best effect. The following are sometimes effective -pince-nez octagonal rimless thick tortoise shell small steel or gold-rimmed typo. Real spectacle must be chosen which do not impede vision.  Shading.  To give ill or very poor appearance A pale face is necessary and of course clothes to suit.  Accesspries. -Cigaretto ash or a little coal dust red pencil.  Method of Use -Rub the cigarette ash or soot well in to the skin round tKc eyes particularly in the pouches below the eyes. Lino -the lids with the red pencil which will give a sore look to the eyes.  EARS .  Preparation -Duo-liquid adhesive or Collodion Flexible .  Method of use -Apply this liquid to the back of your ear and Hol'd' your ear against your head for two to five minutes. This will stick the ear close to the head and will last approximately 24 hours. The same can be done with the lobe of the ear.  NOSE .  Plastic surgery is the only effective method but a moustache and glasses will distract attention from a prominent or bent noso., I  y 6.  -5.  MOUSTACHE AND BEARD.  Tho latter Is inadvisable. A large moustache is a valuable aid to disguise since its removal will considerably alter the appearance. On no account must a false moustache be used. It takes 3-6 weeks to grow a proper moustache  TEETH.  If discolouration is required use iodino allowing it to dry on tho tooth.  CHEEKS .  To disguise hollow cheeks or a thin face insert rubber pads made of sorbo sponge between the cheeks and. teeth  JOWL  An unshaven appearance may be a useful disguise. This can either be genuine or if time does not permit powder the face with cigarette ash and a little charcoal powder using a piece of sponge for this purpose.  LINES .  Exist nt lines can be deepened thus emphasizing eye with a black soft pencil. Smooth over the lines with the finger tip to merge with the skin colour after pencil has been used. Natural lines only must be used.  SCARS.  Existent scars can be largely reduced by plastic surgery.  To create a scar.  Accessories Collodion flexible New Skin or Nail Varnish.  Method of Use -Make a pleat in the skin of the face sad heck. Apply any of the above with a paint brush to the inside of the pleat. Hold the scar for 5-7 minutes until the collodion is dry. Scars should not be made near the mouth. Scars last 5-6 hours if tho skin is not greasy Greasy skin should bo washed and dried before applying the' collodion.  HANDS .  Working hands can be simulated by immersing the hands in hot water to open the pores then rubbing in dirty oil mixed with grit. Wash tho hands afterwards lightly in cold water. Break and soil the nails.  CONCLUSION.  S it down quietly and think out your disguise. Choose a character 'that you know well. Consider not only the articles you will roquiro to effect your physical change and how those can be obtained and camouflaged but the mental change you must make. In this connection try to put yourself completely into tho now character and stay in it. Consider the habits characteristics language and stance of tho new character. If you want to succeed you must bo capable of a complete mental as well as physical change., Y.6. 6' DEMONSTRATION. % Instructor demonstratos on studentsj   i. Scars ii . Eye shading. iii. Hair colouring with 'bianco' and charcoal powder iv Unshaven appearance.  U] -0O0, INTERROGATIONS.  INSTRUCTIPITS FOR DOTY OFFICERS  Duty Officers only will in future be responsible for giving students instructions regarding the rules and conventions of Y.9's. A copy of the written instructions attached hereto will be left with each Course and it is the responsibility of the Duty Officer to see that they are clearly understopd.  Duty Officers may advise students on their cover stories and should always bear In mind the following -points  i. Y.9 s should be as far ii. Students should rely in preparing cover stories but the Duty Officer must allow himself to be used as an.informant for background information etc. iii. Cover stories should iv. Practice Is needed in types of coyer stories such as a .Cover  b .Cover Duty Officers should ensure that such practice is given and It may be necessary to limit the students1 choice of cover story for a particular exercise e.g in X.6 to instruct students that Bournemouth is a restricted Area.and they must on no account admit to having been there.   a .Except In the last Interrogation two will be used as interrogators and no more than three students will be interrogated. If B.O's are available they may bo used as additional Interrogators and a greater number of students interrogated. If the Interrogation ends particularly early the Interrogators may interrogate other students.   b  In the last Interrogation four interrogators used and all the students will be interrogated unless they are a very large number.  c .Students must not be Informed of the maximum number of students interrogated. Those students who are not to be interrogated will attend the interrogation to take notes and to discuss the points involved with the interrogators during the intervals of the proceedings. They must not of course help the interrogators by giving them inside information., INTERROGATIONS.  INSTRUCTIOHS FOR STUDEUTS.  OBJECT .  To provide an Exorcise in Interrogation and Cover.  METHOD.  1. Whenever you loave this House ar -d Grounds for an Exercise other than the Rangeyou will do assumed to be on subversive operations and you must prepares a cover story to account for your movomonts without disclosing.that you were engaged on the Exorcise. You may be interrogated on uhis cover story. 2. .It will be assumed that you are undergoing a course of military training. No questions will be asked as to why you are at this School contents of your. Lectures or your past history. Reference may be made to times of lectures. 3. Your cover story need not necessarily be limited to the  hours of the Exorcise but you must admit that you wore out of the house and grounds during the whole time of your real absence. For example if you are engaged on an exorcise from 2100 to 2300-hours at Point X you may say that you spent from 1900 hours to 2330 hours at Point Y. 4. The Interrogator will not chock your story by calling witnesses such ar our Duty Officers house personnel drivers etc. 5. You must not say you wore alone during the Exqrcisc-. In the field such a story might often bo advisable but you need practice in arr'aging a good story with others-. Therefore you mast tell a story of joint activities with at least one other member of your party. 6. If during the Exercise you have had to produce a cover story to explain your activities you need not continue to maintain that story in the interrogation. It Is an entirely separate exorcise. 7. You may 'use your Instructors and House personnel as an informant service'to increase your knowledge of this ax- ea.  8. You must assume that the Interrogators have all the powers of the' .Police in occupied Europe., INTERROGATIONS.  INSTRUCTIONS FOR INTERROGATORS.  1. Interrogators will le informed by the Duty Officer of. the period of timo on which they will question the students. 2. It will be assumed that students are undergoing a course of military training. No. questions will bo ashed as to why they are at the school or the contents of Lectures. 3. No questions will bo ashed about the student's past unless he brings up the subject himself and then only Tilth great discretion. 4. No witnesses will be called such as the Duty Officer house personnel drivers etc. 5. Correct precise questioning should be the usual line but interrogators should vary their technique occasionally e.g. the second interrogator can be friendly and even jolly or suddenly brusque etc. 6. Duty Officers may request a certain line with individual students. The observation of students' reactions to subtle flattery insults or bullying may be helpful. 7. Students who adopt an impertinent attitude or fail to tahe the interrogation seriously should always be bullied and humiliated. 8. Students should always be searched. 9. Students who are not to be interrogated will attend the interrogation. Interrogators vail discuss any points involved with these students during the intervals of the proceeding.  -oOo- V, , -2   3 During First Week -Brie ng of Student -Stag o  a . Explain gonGX al idea. P Discuss with each student the town to which he  'Will be going. c Consider the question of d .With those'students who arc  the papers they will hoed. Soe notes C' and p .  o . Stress the importance that students properly carry out all orders given and that 'students initiative is limited by those orders.  4 End of Second week beginning of second week 2 wook course ..  Props.rationofstudents instructionsandbriefing -Staj p..IIj.  a  Give students instrue' ..jus without appendices .  b .Discuss individual cover stories in greater llote' D'1. Show students photographs of supposed London residence and plan of London. Students should visit if time permits.  - Explain conditions of contacting and make it clear that contacts must fulfil a. role in student s organisation not merely perform isolated .services. Student must have proper cove for visits to contacts. Several should bo mado.  d .Stress importance of routine security  e .Stress again in gr or detail the importanco out all orders e ag  i. R.Vs. must ii. Students time of the schem'd. iii. Student immediately of his address or any change of address iv. Student as possible and pay him several visits. 5. Early ord week In the case of 2 week.courses towards the one of socond woek. See House Commandant.  a .Advise him of dates and times of students return in tho case of students coming back .  b .Submit to House Commandant pro-forma in cash to be advane A to. students signed by C.I. A.C.I. or Admin Amount to bo shown on Cash Requisition pro-forma  c .Prepare receipts for students to sign Commandant g ves them tho cash.  6 During third week. for 2 week courses -end of second week .  II JR .1.0 and information for appendix.  a .For civilian cover verify details date of H.R.I.C. See note C11 .  b . For cover of soldier on leave -obtain leave pass from A C 1., c  For both types of cover obtain rationicard  A.C.l. d .Complete appendix - see note E .  7. Late third week. ' for two weak courses end of second wook BriefIn g. Stapje III.   a . Revise previous instructions stressing-'the importance of making the contact correctly etc. and stress again the importance of carrying out all orders.   h . A.'-certain the student fully understands the security orders in particular again stress the importance of his Immediately communicating his address to the Security tolephone number. Mention briefly line to be taken In case of any' encounter with Police without warning-that such erg encounter will take place. Warn student not to attempt explanations in the event of his cover story  ' being broken down nr to make any reference to his Training Section to.  Obtain his signature to security orders.   c . Ascertain that information contained in appendix is understood by student. Stress that all orders contained therein must be carried out in particular the student ---must remain the full time in the town and travel by the trains shown.   d . I. Give the student his N.R.I.C. and explain it. See note C .  ii. Student must sigh it in old Ink and fill In necessary date See that document looks its supposed age. Ill Explain out h.S. 2 according to covor.  See note pi .  iv. Ration Card. Explain-system. See note ' 0' . v. Leave pass for students with cover of soldier on leave.  g . Obtain from House Commandant and hand to student money for expenses. Stress importance of limiting expenditure during scheme.   f . Explain briefly to students how to.make out reports. Toll them that headings etc. are shown on list at Malvern Court  8. Before Departure' -storage and disposal of kit. a Students may only take tii thorn luggage which accords with their cover.  b Students going via London will report at Malvern Court and leave genuine documents and surplus kit. Documents left there must be put in a sealed envoiope bearing . tudent s scheme name.  Students kit must be packed and labelled with students scheme name and a list of articles landed in., o . If the students are not going via London spare kit to be forwarded inurtedlately by the House Coraraandant to -   Ensign  To be called for  d . House Q.oiimiand&n-f will than'notify time of train and...receipt number.  o Duty Officer will 1 nd genuine personal donum nts t-o-   A.C.I. for transmission to H.Q . Those returning to Malvern Court  a  will write out report as instructed  b .they will hand in their scheme documents genuine ones and kit in return  c .they will receive instructions whore  N.B -Students who are not returning to Malvern Court vr-l .1 rece ive instructions whore next to  report. Only students -who are not returning to Malvern Court will receive special instructions  . Assemble all reports including letters from R.S.L.O. etc  Report's from R.S.L.O will come direct by ordinary mail.  b .Arrange with A.C.I. to interview not returning to Group B.  c .At interview discuss and criticise student individually.  d .Check that students save returned that there are no o xsr queries outstanding.  e .Compile over-riding report. For Draft to be submitted to C.i. before having typed.   4 copies to go to London 1 copy'to be circulated together with Police contact A.P. reports. Student s report to be. scut to London with Duty Officer s report.  Bullring' and 'Innocent' letters to be destroyed.  t, , NOTE B  N.B. In the case of students going as Civilians the real name must appear on the copies of pro-forma which go to London. SPECIMEN. -PRO-FORMA FOR TYPE 96 HOURS1 SCHLIIE Part 11-'  Organisers lst / 2nd   For any variations from Standard Scheme please see over  Nationzeroise Area ality. erial I'lo. 10 / 27 / No. of scheme. Fro158 m V To Number & category of' stu derits 2-27 Area of Exercise 10 Name of officer at 5.T.S. 51 organ'ls'ing1 the e'xeroise Duty Officer.  Docks ports or industrial premises involved if any Target s  Contacts are required for Both.  Password Student Somehow it seems easy to get lost in this town. Contact You'll get used to it soon I'm sure.  Police Intervention is required for Both on the day before the ex piration of the scheme . Provocation is required for Neither either or both on  Facilities for identification Bogus R.V. to be fixed by London and Group B. informed.  Bogus R.V. fixed if there is or is not provocation., PRO-FORMA FOR TYPE A 96 HOURS' SCHEIiIE Part IL - W/T Oneraters 1st / 2nd  Organisers Sxercise Serial No. 10/27/158 A. DETAILS AS REQUIRED FOR PAPERS OF STUDENTS OPERATING AS CIVILIANS h . .\1 . 3. 4. Symbol 27XY.100 T ' 1  I ' 1 . . . Surname FREEMAN Christian Karnes JOHN .  Date and Place of 10 .5.1908  Birth Paris. . . Married or Single Single.  Residence  in London 25 Ebury street fci.W.l.  Profession Cashier. L- -- - What os' LEEDS  H.R.i. ward FEB. '43  required  L- Security Section to provide IJ.R.I. and K.8. 2. Cards. 1 1 ---.......... .. r. 4 B. DETAILS OF STUDENTS PPL -TIRO M CIVILIAN CLOTHES AS S RDlERS 01 .aVL-L  1. 2. 3. 4. . fc'\[8me FENBION W ' FRANCOIS.  --  Rank sgt. 1 Students will report at Malvern Court Before starting xxxxxxxx the scheme at 0900/hrs on -Starting date of scheme according to trains . 2 The following student ' 27XY.10Q FREEMAN and 27XY.101 FENELON require aceommodatior to be bonked in London for the night of Saturday -Y night before scheme starts . 3 Students will report at Malvern CouH after the scheme at 1500/hrs. on Day after lost day of scheme according to trains. Interview -with. Duty Officer vvi.3T take place at Malvern Court.  On covering letter for Pro-forma state accommodation is required for 27XY. 100 -FLOCON J. real name 27XY.101 -FENELON. F. 0, NOT.u C Fubru fy 44. TK J STUD4NT '3 PAP FS AMD TH..IR R ijATIuN To HIS C0V4R 3T0RY. In future the only N.R.I. c rds vhich v iii be nvailabio for 96 hour schyaaes veixi. bo' those . hioh wore issued to persons arriving in this country between December 1941 end July 1943. The Duty Officer should endeavour to arrange that the student s scov r story fits these conditions. If it is necessary for a student to say that he came to Groat Britain bef. e December x941 or after Jury 1943 he will have to have a NYR.l.C. of which the number is incorrect. It is however uhliheiy that the authorities will notice this. by The salient points of the student's cover story as conditioned the papirs with which we can supply hi i will be ns follows 1 The student can arrive at any port to suit his storj date subject to the condition mentioned above.-He normally 6member this date exactly. .u any would 2 At this port his passport was stamped or if he had no passport he was given a form I.B.23 . He was also instructed to report withHi 7 days to the National Registratlor Office tho Food Office ar. in the cas of persons liable for National Service of any sort to the .Labour .exchange in the town to which he was proceeding. He was further given an emergency ration card. He need remember no other details. 3 The student then proceeded to the town of which the identity is determined by the 3 initial letters of the number of the IT.S.l. card available to him for the exercise. See booklet  Jnless he mows this town he will be advised to cut his  cover stay there as short as possible. 4 At this first town he reported to 6 a. The National Registration Office. Here tie presented his passport or l.B.23 which latter was removed and received in exchange an R.I.C. He n ied not remember any details of this exoe tuat it was buff m colour and similar in size to his present one. b. The Food Office. Here he received his ration book personal points and clothes coupons. He ieed not understand the ration card system clearly as in can say that he always handud the b.y.m to his hostess -r landlady who has always arranged all this for him. All he rie w of the clothes coupons is that he received about 40 and they proved adequate for his needs. c. The labour Exchange. Here he showed his Identity card gave particulars of his qualifications ' various other details about himself and received N.3.2 card as proof of registration. Fee n e D 5 After his registration at the first town at which Lie resided the student can say that he wont anywhere he choos-s. He must however have tsi.cn up his residence at the address in Westminst-r by May 1943 or earlier. He registered this change of address at the National Registration Office Caxton Hall in Westminster which is also the Fud Office. If he was liable-to be called up he sent in his N.3.2 and received a new one his present one with Westminster address. 6 In the summer of 1943 after his arrival Wunt to the Natl nn.L Registration Office in Westminster he again according to, instructijns which Lu r.cocivud from friends and notices which he saw and received a new ration booic and' xdentit/ - Card.  This Identity Card was the one which will be issued to  him for the scheme. Its serial number is .the same as that   f his first N.R.l C.  The Student will be Well advised to say that he had resided in Westminster over since i i.s first arrival there with 'nly short absences. There was a now issue of clothes coupons in the spring of 1943. The student need not hove er .hnow anything about them he can 'say that he thinks t at they Were pink but that he has them lacked up at home., NATIONAL o'JRJICjj' jyc io'1 being in the nr ivd f rcoa stud unis enn offer one of the following explanations.  . Kc is V r or under l e . N.B. Fjr this purpor student s cover ago can sometimes bo suitably adjusted. b He is in a reserved occupation. N.B.  any occupations are reserved above CerV-in ages. i Student's age can therefore soaiotimes be suitably adjusted. See list of reserved occupations . He is physic.ally unfit. 'Weakness .rf hear -lungs r of anything that  ° .g r nnn a in.qi i \T Tru. I .1 q'nT VLj.d  dannot easiey bt isproved He has not yet been called up.  d . N.B. This explanation''enn on.'.y be offered by students whe according to their cover story have been in this country for less than one ywr at most. theoi on  Students will n.ro normally t-nke their N.-S .2 1 e . . 'The  the sc heme but-'they must hav u some knowledge of those cards following brief information is eauired -  GASjn . Student never re-p rted °t the Labour Exchange and Lnras nothing ab .ut N.S.L. because he was under er over a  CA8L b . Student reported at ± .ur exchange g-vo paroicui-rs of hig QUnxifioations ana was advised his occupation was reserved. He received the N.S.d out heard nothing fur the   In view of his nge . CASH c . Student reported °t Labour Exchange gave particulars of . V.iiiiq .-If ToG i v7'' N --3.2 3 L 10 fc1tilv.. iG tuI' he Vv i'S nGV1sgg oy letter tVreport to a school house hospital etc. He can bo quite vague about this in the town ho was then resident where he was medically examined and found unfit. His card was stamped accordingly. Ho hn o hoard nothing further. f  CASH d . Studont reported at j abour -exchange gave particular in onmU  himself received N.S.2 was medically examined n0n fjund nhysioG 1 fit. Hg hns infjniiiud Guthjiit iut of his Cnanges 'of' addre. but has keard nothing further so far. He awaits calling up notice. Obviously ho can hardly have waited as long os a year .. His N.3.2 which no will have left behind bears his /i/estininster addreSe 3 ee it in when he notified the uth-ritios th t he v.-1 o li ving in Westminster. If asked about fir-e-watching he sh ould s ' noth on firl watching. that' he hn.-j po fire ... Xch once v ry 8 nigh either at the office r near his homo. He is not paid. If asked about the Home Guard he sh-uid say  NOTH ON HO Ml GUoRL th'it he nns gained exemption from this duty either eor a medical reasons or b long h of his civilian work., I ii pp -jsrpix -uRa/.iiijxJRa. ' fGa appundix io ro liirod for oach studunt. 1. CONTACT. To bo 'Soloctod according to nature of scLeiaa fro '-.A ll.s 6 of contacts on file or reft to-discretion of .S--. L.O Nncriu Business addross  \ Private address Description Ti.TxC-'..T. PiBBWOBDt  TxR .UN TIM..S For the returii jo'urney you may taho the train to ondon at on --i .ci report to 14 Malvern Court at  hours Tn t he after-noon. You may in no c ircams tone vs leave before nrninh. 5. hDlilNISTRATION.  a You vvili go to Fiat x4 Malvern Court Onslow Square ondon S.V/.l. at hours on in order to leave there your real documents and' s'pafe baggage military kit etc.  b You will go to the same address on  immediately after your reti . in order to Put the report scheme name sc heme name. 6. S.XJRITY RUL-. i. write your report. ii . receive instructions from your your future movements iii. collect your baggage iv. leave your false documents. in an envelope and mark it Report rut the documents in another envelope section about wivu -ur marked with you 's soon as you have found accpu lodation at you will teleprone Capt. h-erem .ulcer Tel number .. ext. and inform him of yeur address. You wiix inform him each time you change your address if you do so. He is available in his office between hours and hours'. i, / NOT. -'V fcoatd . [ CUMVPJNIC ' TI0N3 .. Tne aiassagci to your will contain a stort report of your dealings with the contact. The Innocent nettor wi e. be adurussed to -  Capt. - Room 9o Horse Guards Whitehall 3.W.1 You may make any arrangement yo--like with your Duty officer with regard to the veiled language letter addressed to mr . irs. or  Iiss Bullring 14 Malvern Court Onslow Square jjondon S.V/.l.  3P II'.l CONTiCT. Arrangements have been made for you to be contacted by a reliable man who has already wormed for tee organisation and who may be able to supply you with valuable information. He lives outside  and should be able to supply you with informntior about outside the town ARRANGHMDMTS FOR R . V On the you v- iil be from to hours . You wil. be carrying a Penguin Boom and will be contacted by a ms. also carrying a enguinn Book who will give you the password  hat do you think of the news from the Far Hast To which you w iii reply  it could be better it might be arse Remain there for the Whole hour rndic-ted.   3, I'TOTJJ U APPENDIX -ORG/ilTISJaRS . TARGET Note for Duty Officer 1 Irifor[aotlo n. Only targets an the list supplied hy M.I.5. may he used students will not carry out investigations of any target other than'the o.ne So-lected . Tue students must confine their investigations to the security regulations of the targets selected or the destination of the goods manufactured there. They may not enter tax t by stealth i.e. by climbing walls etc. They may however enter by guile e.g. passing as a workman fraudulently obtaining an invitation from the Managing Director etc. NJ3. Docks under no circumstances ray be used as targets for 96 hours schemes., /  NOTij r F .. KLADINGS FOR DUTy UFF ' wR'S ItJPwRT  ON SG1UJMR.  Note If any serious errors in the organisation of tha scheme have been committed by Group B S.T.S H.Q . the R.o.L.u. or the Police they should be glossed over in the report but dealt with in detail in a covering letter which will be regarded as part cf the report. The reason for tin ' is that reports are sent to R.S.L.O.s and often submitted oo uu Police. Wo do not therefore want our own errors to be broadcast oo them or for them to contain criticisms of Police or M.I.5. It does not iriuan that mistakes are to be investigated. The covering letter will go to H.Q . and can be dealt with there ns seen fit.  Target Task will be include in the heading of the report.  1. Cover and how maintained for scheme and for permanent st y.  . Accommodation  -ditto  3. Routine Security Precautions. a Against surveillance. b Against search c Any other .  4 ivlothod of contacting str ger .  How contact wins approached and recruited. What role allotted and instructions given.  5. Rol for which stranger recruiter. 6. 3ecurity arr-'-aigements for denliny vaith strany-.r' a Meeting. b Clandestine communications.  7 Bogus R.V. and Provocation  a Information ibout reccf of target.  9 Bullring Letter.  10 Innocent .better.   Police interrogation. 12. Comments on student's report. 13 . General comments., V  to  96 HOURS 5CIi IE.  Instructions to Student.  I OBJECT.  The object of the scheme Is to give you practice in .  a. Organising subversive work and putting Into practice the various security measures thereby entailed. You will go under a false Identity and will be provided with false papers.  b. Contacting a friendly stranger and recruiting and instructing him for a special task. c. Setting up and using a system of clandestine communication. d. Collecting information aboata specific target -for areas on j attached lists. Survey of Area for other areas.  SITUATION.  a. You are a member of a subversive organisation work....g under a false identity. b. Because of your Illegal activities all the authorities i. e. police military etc. are agskLnst you. You must  not disclose your activities to mc%bers of the public other than thoso specifically referred to in the Appendix.  c. The controls and regulations will be 'identical with those at present in force in England . 3. TASKS. a. Cover. ' Build up your cover. You must have-an explanation for  your presence and activities in the town and for your own  past. All your actions throughout the scheme -i o. the  place where you lodge the spots you visit the money you spend etc. -should accord or be consistent with your cover.  b. Contact. You are to contact tho person of whom details are given in the Appendix. Ho has boon warned of your coming and told that you will make yoursolf known to him by use of  this password Somehow it seems easy to get lost in this  town to which he will reply You'll got used to it soon I'm sure.  He is known to bo favourable to your cause and wil  willing to help you provided that he considers you a suitable  person with whom to work.   Note F'. i dealings with your contact it will be assumed  that England is occupied by the Gormans and he has been instructed to act .on those lines.  You must have a suitable /er for approaching the contact  which Will protect you both and satisfy everybody.  Preparo the ground for tho introduction of your password by a conversation with him on tho subject of the cover story for your call., , NO i -/ W/T-OPERATORS HOURS SCtLi/LO. AMENDMENTS TO IXISTiNG 1RSTN TCTIJNS FOR OT'JDjJTTS PROCEEDING ON W/ SCHEMES The object of this scheme is to give you practice in living a double life and taking initial steps in arranging clandestine facilities vhich you will require ns a W/T Operator. fv You will not take your set with you. It is assumed that it will be delivered to you later.  vi You will take initial step in arranging clandestine facilities which you will require as a wireless operator Find four places rom hich -ju can work your set or sets. They may be empty houses w you would rent or borrow   h the house of some person whom yru think you can recruit etc etc. Obtain as much information about the houses as possible e.g. exits facilities for surveillance hiding  place for set electric voltage etc.]