[, References To Date To Date To Date To Date BJSM811IM7-'43, /  THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF WASHINGTON  m mm  SECRET  MEMORANDUM PO REDMAN  O.S.S. Operations in the European Theater o.s.s. Enclosures A J.C.S. 406 Copy No 42 .   B Cable from General Devers dated 25 August 1943. Copy No. 19 You will note that one of the recommendations con tained in paragraph 9 of J.C.S. 406 which have been approved by the U. S. Joint Chiefs of Staff provides that upon receipt of General Dovers s reply that the U. S. Joint Chiefs of Staff will obtain the comments of the British Chiefs of Staff before taking final action with the view of implementing the O.S.S. operations in the European Theater.  You will note that Enclosure B contains General Devers s comments on O.S.S. operations in the European Theater. It is requested that the comments of the British Chiefs of Staff be furnished at the earliest possible date. Shipment of men and equipment for this O.S.S. project have been held up for considerable time pending final approval of the project.  SECRET, ENCLOSURE B  i-SECRET  WAR DEPARTMENT  JBJB 55  CLASSIFIED MESSAGE CENTER GGW filed 2000Z/25 26 August 1943 EM  INCOMING MESSAGE312 From 'L5SFOR London  To War  No 13593 25 August 1943  To use OSS to maximum extent in support of operations initiated in this theater it is my purpose  For Joint Chiefs of Staff signed Uevers reference letter JLS dated 14 July 1943 our W 2864 August 6 and your R 1716 August 11  Functions of the OSS in conduct of psychological warfare will be those outlined in JCS directive 155/7/D. Activities of OSS in this theater will be projects approved by me in furtherance of operational plans of this theater and such other special projects or missions as may be assigned to OSS by Joint Chiefs of Staffs If is desirable that Joint Chiefs of Staff prescribe OSS activities which do not relate to operational plans of ETOUSA and which require contact with allied governments in exile in London.  Intelligence collecting activities of OSS will be coordinated with those of Military Attache to allied Govern ments in exile Biddle Embassy .  q ommander of OSS Detachment here will be made responsible for proper coordination of operations of OSS both with British agencies and with interested American agencies in this theater. Manning tables for OSS organization here have been approved by me and are in the hands of the War Department.  Estimate of OSS personnel required by 31 December 1943 is as shown on proposed T/Q dated 24 June 1943 and delivered by General Abbott.  The nature of OSS activities in the Theater will be Counter-espionage in zone of allied armies or territory occupied by them. Control of action of Rouble agents in collaboration with British Deception Service Handling and operation of agents who will be passed through enemy lines mainly to obtain tactical informa   CM-IN-19511 26 Aug 43  SECRET COPY No. 19  THE MAKING OF AN EXACT COPY OF THIS MESSAGE IS FORBIDDEN, SECRET  WAR DEPARTMENT CLASSIFIED MESSAGE CENTER  INCOMING MESS4Q  From USFOR London Tos Wsir Mo 13593 25 August 1943. tion and conduct psychological warfare activities. Recruitfrment organization and training of sabotage. Guerilla and resistance groups and units in conjunction with similar British groups. Training of selected personnel In British School for .Special Operations Establishment in conjunction with British of such radio communications system necessary for proper execution of above named projects. It is expected by using the OSS as indicated in paragraph 6 above to develop OSS activities to maximum extent  Equipment consisting of only 4 items over and above that already authorized by JCS will be provided for OSS activities at expense of the military forces in ETOUSA.  In lieu of letter referred to in our W-3129 August 130943S this cable is sent.  No Sig NOTES W 2364 is CM-IN-4273 6 Aug 43 Gen Deane JC/S X 1716 is CM-CUT-3991 11 Aug 43. Gen Deane JC/S W 3129 is CM-IN-9712 13 Aug 43 Gen Deane JC/S ACTIONS GEN DEANE JC/S INFORMATION OPD G-2 CM-IN-19511 26 Aug 43 0916Z vc .. . SECRET COPY No. THE MAKING OF AN EXACT COPY OF THIS MESSAGE IS FORBIDDEN, ENCLOSURE A  SECRET COPY NO. 320-7 LIMITED DISTRIBUTION   J.C.S. 406 320 13 July 19 3  1 J.P.S. 178/D 2 J.P.S. 178/1   Pages 1-23 incl. 3 J.Ad.C. 19 4 J.Ad.C. 19/1 5 j.p.s. 178/2 6 j.p.s. 178/3  JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF  O.S.S. OPERATIONS IN THE EUROPEAN THEATER Report by the Joint Staff Planners  1. The Joint Staff Planners have reviewed the plan for O.S.S. operations in the European Theater Enclosure A which was ap proved in principle by the former Commanding General U.S. Army Forces in the European Theater of Operations and forwarded through the War Department to the Joint Staff Planners for study and recommendation to the Joint Chiefs of Staff. 2. The Director of Strategic Services.has approved this plan and it is stated that special arrangements In London have been made with the British Special Operations Executive S.O.E. . It is not known whether these arrangements have been approved by the British Chiefs of Staff. 3. The Director of Strategic Services lists the communications equipment Enclosure B required in addition to requirements listed in the O.S.S. 1943 Catalogue in order to undertake the proposed O.S.S. activities in the European Theater of Operations. \   4. The Joint Administrative Committee reviewed these addition al O.S.S. requirements for signal communications equipment and after consultation With the O.S.S. recommended the deletion of certain Items because of shortages in those categories  Enclosure C . 1, SECRET  5. In the light of the recommendations of the Joint Administra tive Committee the Office of Strategic Services was requested to report the effect of the deletions upon the successful execution of O.S.S. operations in the European Theater of Operations. O.S.S. informed the Planners Enclosure D that most of the deletions could be accepted but listed certain items essential to the successful execution of the operation assigned to O.S.S. by the Commanding General U.S. Forces European Theater of   Operations. This statement was referred informally to the Joint Administrative Committee which on careful reconsideration re  iterated its former recommendations.  6. Projected schedule of monthly transportation requirements for O.S.S. personnel to the European Theater of Operations through 31 December 19 3 as estimated by O.S.S. is tabulated in Enclosure E. 7. In view of recent strategic decisions and the change of command of U.S. forces in the British Isles it appears desirable that the subject papers be referred to General Devers for his comments and recommendations and for the preparation of an out line plan for O.S.S. operations in the European Theater of Opera tions. To avoid in the European Theater of Operations the mis understandings in command and control arrangements that have de veloped in other British areas namely Burma and the Middle East it is desirable that General Devers give particular attention to matters of coordination between the O.S.S. and S.O.E. in the European Theater of Operations. 8. It is believed that the Joint Chiefs of Staff should like wise obtain the comments of the British Chiefs of Staff before approving a plan for O.S.S. operations in a British area of strategic responsibility. 2, SECRET  RECOMMENDATIONS  9. a. That the Joint Chiefs of Staff refer Enclosures A  B 11 C D and E to the Coramanding General U.S. Army Forces in the European Theater of Operations with an accom panying letter Enclosure F requesting his comments in order that the Joint Chiefs of Staff may be informed as to General Devers' desires in the matter. b. That no further shipments of men and equipment for this O.S.S. project be authorized until final approval is given by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. c . That upon receipt of General Devers 1 reply the Joint Chiefs of Staff obtain the comments of the British Chiefs of i Staff before taking final action on the O.S.S. proposal.  3, SECRE T  ENCLOSURE  A  OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT LONDON ENGLAND  March 5 1943  Subject O.S.S. Operations -E.T.O  To Lieut-General Frank M. ANDREWS Commanding General U.S. Forces E.T.O. London England.  1. Pursuant to the provisions of directive No. 155/4/d dated December 23 1942 from the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Director of the Office of Strategic Services author ization is hereby requested from the Theatre Commander for the conduct of O.S.S. activities within and from the United Kingdom as follows  a. SI activities in the Scandinavian countries and Western Europe including the Iberian Peninsula b . &0 activities in the areas aforesaid limited however in the Iberian Peninsula Sweden Finland and Switzerland to preliminary contact work the establishment of reasonable facilities for communication and the gathering of information useful to operational planning   . Counter subversive activities in such areas and counter intelligence measures in and from this theatre as authorized by J.C.S. Directive 155/4/D of December 23 1942 and  Appendix and d.Training within the theatre of O.S.S. operative   2. The following action is also requested a.. The activation of an adequate Table of Organization for O.S.S. in this theatre -4  Enclosure l A, SECRET  b. The furnishing of cover for O.S.S. activities in and from this theatre through the designation of the organization activated as requested above as Experimental Detachment G-3  c. The establishment between O.'S.S. Headquarters in this theatre and G-3 of E.T.O. of proper liaison  i. For the clearance. through G-3 of all operational projects and all requirements of supply and transportatior of O.S.S. which are related to operations within this Theatre and the Areas above-mentioned and ii. For communication through G-2 of military intel ligence items . d. The issuance of instructions to proper authorities covering the furnishing to O.S.S. of facilities of transpor tation air and sea within this Theatre to the extent that such facilities are available and are required for opera tional purposes.  3. Authority is likewise requested for / a. The drawing or the acquisition and shipment of such supplies and equipment and replacement as expenditures are made as may be necessary and as shall be available for O.S.S. operations in and from this Theatre / b. The establishment and operation subject to the pro visions of certain understanding between O.S.S. British  S.O.E. and the Controller Special Communications covered in correspondence dated January 6 9 and 15 1943 copies of which were submitted January 14 1943 to Brigadier-General E. S. Hughes U.S.A. then Chief of Staff E.T.O. of com munications facilities/4dequate to service field sets oper ating in and from the Areas aforesaid to the number of approximately 75 and to maintain contact with other O.S.S. stations and the dispatching to this Theatre of such equip ment including mobile stations and personnel as shall be necessary for the proper functioning of such facilities. -5-   Enclosure A, SB CRET  c. The transfer to this Theatre of commissioned enlisted and civilian personnel to the number exclusive of opera tives and operational groups of' approximately 250 for the calendar year 1943 for administration operational super vision training and supply as may be necessary in connec tion with the conduct of the activities set forth above and d. The despatching to this Theatre of Auxiliary Operations Groups for use particularly in Norway Prance and the Low countries to the number of approximately a dozen. hi  Ellery C. Huntington Jr. Lieut-Colonel A.U.S.  Special Representative  Director Office of  Strategic Services.  Enclosure A, SECRET  APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE A  HEADQUARTERS COMMANDING GENERAL U. S. FORCES EUROPEAN THEATER OF OPERATIONS   Ltr. from Office of Strategic Services United States Government 5 March 19 3 Subj O.S.S. Operations -E.T.O.  AG 381 M 1st Ind. CHB/ejd  Hq. ETOUSA 11 March 1943.  TO Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee War Department Washington D.C.  1. Approved subject to the provisions of Paragraph 3 b basic letter. 2. Attention is invited to Paragraph 6 Directive U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff No. 155/4/d dated 23 December . In this con nection the A. C. of S. G-2 is designated as the representative of the Theater Commander and as such O.S.S. in this Theater will function under the direction of this office. The A. C. of S. G-2 will establish the necessary liaison for all O.S.S. opera tional projects with the G-3 Section. 3. Attention is further invited to Paragraph 2 a basic letter. It is understood that the T.O. mentioned therein will be based on the T.O. Headquarters and Headquarters Detachment O.S.S. Annex A. J.C.S. Directive No. 155/4/d 23 December. An examination of this T.O. shows that it provides the necessary personnel and enumerates the grades and ratings for O.S.S. Branch Offices. For the Commanding General  /s/ C. H. BARTH Colonel G.S.C. Chief of Staff.  7 Appendix to Enclosure ''A ', SECRET  ENCLOSURE B'  OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES WASHINGTON D. C.  May 28 19 3  Subject Statement of Communj.cations Equipment required to activate paragraph 3 b. Enclosure A .  ITEM QUANTITY 1 1 2 2 3 50 5 50 6 200 7 300 8 25 9 50 10 25 11 25 12 50 13 25 14 25 15 5 16 10 17 5 18 25 19 20 20 25 DESCRIPTION Transmitter 5KW AVT-22B Transmitter 1KW ET-4331 Receiver Hallicrafters  S29  Receiver Hallicrafters  S27 Receiver RCA AR-88 Transmitter Receiver  Portable SSTR-1  Pover Supply Part of Item 6 P-1 P-2 P-4 Power Supply Solid Fuel  Burning P-3  Generator Hand Carter  Transceiver SSTC-1  Transmitter Receiver  Portable SSTR-3  Transceiver SSTC-2  Transmitter Receiver  Portable SSTR-4  Transmitter Receiver Portable SSTR-5 Transmitter SST-6 Signalling Equipment LI-1 Signalling Equipment LI-2 Signalling Equipment LI-3 Signalling Equipment NAN-1 Signalling Equipment NAN-2  END USE Comm. Base Comm. Base SO&SI -Subbase  Comm. Base  Comm. Base SO& SI  SO& SI  SO & SI  SO& SI SO& SI SO&SI -Subbase  SO& SI SO& SI  SO & SI Sub base  Sub-base SO& SI SO& SI SO& SI SO& SI SO& SI  -   8  Enclosure B1, SECRET  ITEM QUANTITY DESCRIPTION END USE 21 10 Frequency Meter Set SCR-211 Comm Base 22 3 Perforator Set TG-11 Comm Base 23 3 Perforator Transmitter Distribution Set TG-23 Comm. Base 24 5 Power Unit PE-95 Comm. Base & Sub base 25 6 Radio Set SCR-288 Sub-base 26 2 Radio Set SCR-299 Mobile Sub base 27 1 Radio Station Mobile WC-52 with SCR-284 Sub base 28 15 Radio Set SCR-694 SO & SI 29 3 Reperforator' Transmitter Distributor Set TG-13 Comm. Base 30 Reperforator Set TG-13 Comm. Base 31 Teletypewriter Set TC-15 Comm. Base 32 50 Typewriter EC-88 Comm. Base & Sub- Base 35 50 Signal Lamp Equipment SE-11 SO & SI 34 Chanalyst 3F4059 Comm. Base & Sub Base 35 Oscilloscopes 5F3600 36 1 Switchboard BD-14-5 Comm. Base 37 2 Generator Witte Diesel 7.5KVA Comm Base 38 10 Recorders RC-17 Comm. Base 39 4 Tube Testers Hickock Type 510X Comm. Base 40 Frequency Standard Millen Type S0575 Comm. Base 41 Signal Shifter Meissner Type 9-1078 Comm. Base 42 Voltolrmeters Simpson Model 235 Comm. Base 43 5000 lbs. Antenna Equipment Comm. Base & Sub Base 44 1000 lbs Tools Comm. Base & Sub Base 45 2000 lbs. Parts spare Comm Base & Sub Base Enclosure B, SECRET  ENCLOSURE C  O.S.S OPERATIONS IN THE EUROPEAN THEATER  Report by the Joint Administrative Committee  THE PROBLEM  1. To review requirements for communications and signallinr equipment for the Office of Strategic Services for special operations in the European Theater. 2. To give probable date that the equipment could be made available. To state the effect of these requirements upon requirements for communications equipment by Army Navy International Aid and other Governmental agencies.  FACTS SEARING ON THE PROBLEM  4. There is a dearth of communications equipment which at the present time is not being produced in quantities sufficient to meet the demands of Army and Navy combat forces. 5. Combat operations both Army and Navy are being restricted by shortage of communications equipment. 6. The Joint Administrative Committee notes that the success of the operations of the Office of Strategic Services depends largely upon their being supplied with sufficient communications equipment. 7. For a report on the availability of the equipment specified in Enclosure B see attached Appendix. -10 -   Enclosure c, SECRET  CONCLUSIONS  8. That operations can be carried out without Items 14 15 22 23 28 29 30 31 and 32 See Appendix . 9. That Items 3 and 26 are very desirable for the smooth operation of the plan but will not prevent the operations being carried to a successful conclusion if they cannot be supplied. 10. That all other items are essential and can be furnished on or before October 31 1943 with a distribution priority directly below overseas combat forces. RECOMMENDATIONS  11. That Items 3 14 15 22 23 26 28 29 30 31 and 32 be deleted from the requirements. 12. That Items 43 44 and 45 be approved subject to their availability when requirements are presented by O.S.S. to appro priate service agencies in specific types and quantities. 13. That the Office of Strategic Services present their need for Items 1 and 2 to the Munitions Assignments Committee Ground for consideration. 14. That the remaining items be approved subject to the   provisos in the column headed Comment in the attached Appendix and assigned a distribution priority at the top of A-3.  11  Enclosure C, SECRET  APPENDIX TO ENCLOSURE C  Report on Availability of Equipment Specified in Enclosure B  ITEM 1  2  3  4  5 6  7  8  9  10  ii  QUANTITY 1  2  50  2  50 200  300  25 50 25 25  DESCRIPTION  Transmitter 5KW AVT-22B  Transmitter 1KW  ET-4331  Receiver Halli   crafters S-29  Receiver Halli   crafters S-27  Receiver RCA  Ar-88  ' Transmitter Re ceiver Portable SSTR-1  Power Supply Part Item 6 P-1 P-2 P-4  Power Supply Solid Fuel Burning P-3  Generator Hand  Carter  Transceiver  SSTC-1  Transmitter Re ceiver Portable SSTR-3  12  COMMENT  Small quantity of this item  is on order at present time for International Aid Sig nal Corps. First delivery  expected to be in October  1943. If this item is di  verted it will have to be  taken from British Air Com mission.  There are approximately 400  of this item in current pro  duction. The order was placed for United Kingdom by International Aid Signal Corps. This item can be di  verted.  This item is in current pro duction. However it Is a  critical item and is badly needed by the Army Ground Forces and Army Air Forces.  If diverted it will inter fere with the program of  the combat forces.  This item is in current pro duction on Navy orders. This can be delivered in August without interference to Navy program.  This item can be supplied from OSS stock.  ditto  ditto  ditto  ditto  ditto  ditto  Appendix to Enclosure C, SECRET  ITEM  12 13  14  15  16  17 18 19  20 21  22  QUANTITY  50 25  25  5  10  5 25 20  25 10  3  3  Transmitter Re ceiver Portable SSTR-4  Transmitter Re ceiver Portable SSTR-5  Transmitter SST-6  Signalling Equip ment LI-1  Signalling Equip ment LI-2  Signalling Equip ment LI-3  Signalling Equip ment NAN-1  Signalling Equip ment NAN-2  Frequency Meter Set SCR-211  Perforator Set TG-11  Perforator Trans mitter Distribution  Set TG-23  -13 -   DESCRIPTION COMMENT Transceiver SSTC-2 This item can he supplied  from OSS stock.  ditto  This item is not in current production and is at present under development. Delivery can be accomplished in the sixth month after placing the order. This vill not adversely affect the Army and Navy supply program.  This item is not in current production and is at present under development. Delivery can be accomplished in the sixth month after placing the order. This will not affect the Army and Navy supply program.  This item can be supplied from OSS stock.  ditto  ditto  This item is under develop ment by Navy. Delivery can probably be accomplished within 90 days.  ditto  This item can be diverted immediately without material interference with the Army program.  Existing production of this  item badly over-burdened and the supply for the armed forces is woefully lacking. However this item could be delivered within 90 days if the need is greater than the needs of the armed forces.  ditto  Appendix to Enclosure C, SECRET  ITEM QUANTITY 24 5  25  26  27  28  29  30  6  1  15  3  3  DESCRIPTION Power Unit PE-95  Radio Set SCR-288  Radio Set SCR-299   Mobile  Radio Station Mo  bile WC-52 with  SCR-284  Radio Set SCR-694  Reperforator Trans mitter Distributor Set TG-13  Reperforaton Set TG-13  14  COMMENT  This item is now in current production. There are not sufficient quantities avail able to meet the requirements of troops for overseas opera tions. However a substitute type of the same power output can be supplied by Signal Corps without adverse effect on the Army program.  This item is not in produc tion and Is a previous Army standard not available from stock. It is recommended that the SCR-284 be substi tuted.  This item is now in current production for Army Air Forces Army Ground Forces and International Aid. There is however a great shortage of this particular type of equipment and if these units are diverted it will cause serious interference with the Army program. It is not ex pected that these units could be diverted before March 1944. Total Army requirements for this item for 1943 are 6000 units and to date only 1182 have been delivered.  Signal Corps can divert 1 SCR-284 immediately. The WC-52 weapons carrier can be obtained from Army Ord nance without adverse effect on the Army program.  This item is now under de velopment and the estimated date of completion of develop ment work cannot be estab lished at this time. It is therefore impossible to give estimate of delivery. The OSS can utilize a satisfactory substitute now available to them.  This item is in the same cate gory as Items 21-23 inclusive. To divert this quantity would seriously interfere with the Army program.  ditto   Six SCR-284's could be di verted from Army stock with out interference to the Army program.  Appendix to Enclosure ''C'1, DESCRIPTION  Teletypewriter Set TC-15  Typewriter MC-88  Signal Lamp Equip ment SE-11  Chanalyst 3Fk059  Oscilloscopes  3F3600  Switchboard BD   14-5  Generator Witte Diesel 7.5 KVA  COMMENT'  This is a very critical item  which is at present under  development. No estimate  can be made on delivery.  This is an allocated item and is not in production at pres ent. The allocation is not sufficient to meet present immediate Army requirements. To divert any quantity would seriously interfere with the Army program. The success of this project will not be materially affected by the lack of this item.  This is a new item in current production. First delivery expected to be made in June 1943. There are 51 541 of this unit on order of which 47 000 are required by the Army during 1943. It is be lieved that 50 could be di verted during the month of October without adverse ef fect on the Army program.  This item is in current pro duction for the Army and Navy and International Aid. How ever production is below present requirements but it is believed that 3 could be diverted without serious effect on the program.  This item is not available but a satisfactory equivalent type can be supplied immedi ately by the Army.  This is a limited standard Signal Corps item and has not been purchased for years. There are none in stock. Inasmuch as it would be un economical to set up produc tion for one unit it is recommended that similar commercial type be substi tuted which can be secured in sixty 60 days.  This item or a similar type  is scheduled for production  in August. Diversion could be made by Signal Corps with  out material adverse effect on Army program.  -15 -   Appendix to Enclosure C, SECRET  ITEM QUANTITY DESCRIPTION 38 10 Recorders RC-17  39 4 Tube Testers Hickok. Type 510X  COMMENT  This item not available in  sufficient quantities to meet Army requirements. It  is recommended that the Navy portable type recorder. Type PD PE or PJ Soundscriber be procured. This item could-be delivered in about 90 days and without material adverse effect on Navy program.  Signal Corps have only one of this type on order. How ever the unit could be de  livered from manufacturer within 90 days after order  if scheduled by WPB.  40 3 Frequency Standard This item can be supplied  Millen Type 90575  41 3 Signal Shifter Meissner Type 9-1078  42 Voltohmeters Simpson Model 235  43 5000 lbs. Antenna Equipment  44 1000 lbs. Tools  45 2000 lbs. Parts spare  from OSS stock.  This item can be diverted immediately from the Army without adverse effect on Army program.  This item not at present in production for the Army or Navy. Units however could be procured in about 30 days after order if scheduled by WPB.  Unable determine availability of this equipment inasmuch as sufficient detailed informa tion is not given on the original requirements list.  ditto  ditto  -16 -   Appendix to Enclosure C, SECRET  ENCLOSURE D  OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES WASHINGTONs D. C.  28 June 1943  MEMORANDUM FOR -The Joint Staff Planners.  Subject O.S.S. Operations in the European Theater.  Reference a. Memorandum Secretary Joint Staff Planners to Director of Strategic Services 21 June 1943.  1. In compliance with paragraph 2 of reference a above the Office of Strategic Services has examined the report of the Joint Administrative Committee and respectfully submits the following observations on the effect the recommended action would have on the successful execution of O.S.S. operations in the European Theater of Operations. 2. -The Office of Strategic Services shortage of communications and signalling equipment and the fact that the combat operations of the Army and Navy are being restricted because of this shortage accedes to the recommenda tion of the Joint Administrative Committee that the following% items be deleted from Enclosure E Items 3 14 15 28 29 30 and 31 3. It is respectfully requested however that the Joint Staff Planners reconsider fully the recommendations of the Joint Administrative Committee with respect to Items 22 23 26 and 32 on the grounds that these items are essential to the success ful execution of the operations assigned to O.S.S. by the Com manding General U.S. Forces E.T.O. Justification for this request is set forth below. -17  /  Enclosure D, SECRET  4. Item 22 -3 Perforator Sets TG-11. Item 23-3 Peforator Transmitter Distribution Sets TG-23. O.S.S. agents necessarily are selected primarily for their qualifications as undercover agents and only secondarily for their aptitude in radio communication. While they are given extensive training in radio communication they are not skilled radio operators comparable to those maintained at base stations. Furthermore agents work under extremely difficult conditions of strain and must use light portable equipment. It follows that they are capable only of receiving words which are transmitted to them under conditions of perfect slow transmission. It is virtually impossible for base station operators to transmit perfect characters at a speed of 5 to & words per minute and consequently perforators and auto transmitters are essential to O.S.S. operations. Furthermore because agents cannot always receive and transmit on schedule the base station must be prepared to take and send messages on zero notice. Therefore message traffic for each agent is perforated on two special tapes as soon as it is originated one tape carrying each word singly and the second tape each word doubly. Thus the base station can give each agent his message traffic on a moment's notice slow fast or with repetitions depending on circuit conditions.  5. Item 25-2 Radio Sets SCR-299 mobile . Attention is respectfully invited to Enclosure A para graph 3 b and Appendix to Enclosure A ' paragraph 1 In which the Office of Strategic Services requested and obtained the approval of the Commanding General U. S. Forces E.T.O. for the dispatch to the theater of mobile stations. The mobile stations as the Commanding General understood and approved are for use on and after D-Day with the invasion forces so that the field commanders may receive information from and give instructions to  18  Enclosure hD, O.S.S. operatives behind enemy lines. Without such mobile stations such traffic would have to pass between field head quarters and agents via base stations in the United Kingdom and A.F.H.Q. with consequent loss of time security and efficiency. 6. Item 32 -50 Typewriters MC-88. The Office of Strategic Services recognizes that the re quirement for typewriters is high compared with the average Army installation. This is due to several factors among which are the extremely exacting nature of the work the fact that the base station must have message traffic for each agent prepared in advance for transmission on zero notice and the fact that the operations require a larger number of operators for a small number of circuits than is required in a standard station.  The most important factor however is that O.S.S. is forced by circumstances to employ a complicated memory cipher which is difficult to use under normal conditions and much more difficult under conditions when the agent and the deciphering clerk are working under great strain. Under such conditions hand written or hand printed messages are d angerous because one or two mistaken letters may destroy the whole meaning of the message. An example of this exact problem recently caused the loss so far as we can ascertain of a very important agent. He was received on zero notice on an emergency contact and his message insisted that he must have an answer to his message in two hours. He was obviously agitated attempting to transmit much faster than his normal speed and when his message was trans cribed for the deciphering room and in the recording by hand his message became garbled. It took more than two hours to break the message down and the man did not receive his reply. We have been unable to contact him since that time.  Enclosure D  -19, SECRET  7. This office further respectfully requests that final action on the request for authority to conduct operations in the European Theater of Operations be expedited by the Joint Staff Planners in so far as possible due to the fact that the Operations Division War Department General Staff has taken the position that further O.S.S. personnel destined for the E.T.O. will not be cleared for transportation until the Joint Chiefs of Staff have approved O.S.S. operations in that theater  memorandum to the J.C.S. from the Assistant Chief of Staff Operations Division War Department General Staff dated 13 June 19 3 . /s/ G. EDWARD BUXTON Acting Director  Enclosure D, SECRET  ENCLOSURE 11E % EUROPEAN THEATER PROPOSED SCHEDULE OF TRANSPORTATION OF PERSONNEL OVERSEAS  July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. TOTAL  Army Officers 50 85 45 43 15 6 242  Army Enlisted Men 88 314 142 89 28 16 677 WAACS 33 29 0 0 0 0 62 Naval Officers 2 5 7 6 2 1 23 Naval Enlisted Men 17 9 18 5 7 4 60 Marine Officers 3 2 4 4 0 0 13 Marine Enlisted Men 870 0 0 0 15 Civilians 17 15 3 0 40 TOTALS 218 466 217 150 54 27 1132   Includes Operational Groups 54 Officers 344 Enlisted Men   Includes Field Photographic Branch  1 Naval Officer 1 Marine Officer 12 Naval Enlisted Men  21  Enclosure E, SECRET  ENCLOSURE F  PROPOSED LETTER TO COMMANDING GENERAL U.S. ARMY FORCES IN THE EUROPEAN THEATER OF OPERATIONS  Subect O.S.S. Operations in the European Theater.  1. The Office of Strategic Services has requested the Joint Chiefs of Staff to authorize certain psychological warfare activities in the European Theater of Operations. The enclosed report by the Joint Staff Planners J C.S. 406 sets forth the broad objectives of the O.S.S. proposal and shows to what extent the activities contemplated by the O.S.S. were approved by Lieutenant General Frank M. Andrews. Availability of communi cations equipment essential to undertake the O.S.S. project is set forth in this paper. Any equipment over and above that authorized will have to be provided at the expense of the military forces in the European Theater of Operations. 2. The U.S. Chiefs of Staff have authorized certain functions for the Office of Strategic Services in the conduct of psycho logical warfare. These functions are outlined in J.C.S. 155/7Ab which supersedes J.C.S. 155/4/d a copy of which has been for warded to your headquarters. Your attention is invited to paragraph 6 of this directive which requires that O.S.S. opera tions be conducted under direct control of the theater commander and specifies that such operations will not be undertaken except as approved by the theater commander. For such opera tions undertaken in British areas of strategic responsibility the U.S. Chiefs of Staff intend this control and direction to be vested in the Commanding General of U.S. Forces In the area. As the British however must be responsible for the general direction and control of S.0 E.--0.S.S. activities in your area you will be responsible for coordinating as may be necessary the activities of the O.S.S. in conjunction with the appropriate British authorities. 22  Enclosure F, SECRET  Your comments and recommendations are desired on the  O.S.S. proposal before final consideration is given to the 0.3.3. activities by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Due to the fact that the O.S.S. is relatively a new organization with unusual methods of operation it is suggested that prior to submitting your comments you give particular consideration to the following a. Staff organization and procedure necessary for the supervision of O.S.S. operations and for coordination with appropriate British agencies. b. Elimination of such O.S.S. personnel or activities as would duplicate missions assigned to Army and Navy agencies. c. The monthly estimate of O.S.S. personnel required through 31 December 19 3 d. The outline plan for O.S.S. operations in the European Theater of Operations particularly as to the nature of O.S.S activities and the estimated results that may be expected in using the O.S.S. as a psychological warfare agency to further future military operations in that theater. -23 -   Enclosure F, COPY NO.  To Chiefs of Staff From Joint Staff Mission Dated 31st August 194-3  MOST SECRET IMPORTMT J SJL- L14Z  U.S. Chiefs of Staff have asked for comments of British Chiefs of Staff regarding operations proposed hy O.S.S. in European Theatre. Activities proposed are as follows. a. SI activities in the Scandinavian countries and Western Europe including the Iberian Peninsula b. SO activities in the areas aforesaid limited however in the Iberian Peninsula Sweden Finland and Switzerland to preliminary contact work the establish ment of reasonable facilities for communication and the gathering of information useful to operational planning c. Counter subversive activities in such areas and counter intelligence measures in and from this theatre and d. Training within the theatre of O.S.S. operatives. 2. Authority is also requested by O.S.S for the establishment and operation of communications facilities sub ject to the provisions of certain understanding arrived at in January 1943 between O.S.S. S.O.E. and the Controller of Special Comraunications. Also for the despatch to the European Theatre of auxiliary operations groups1 to the number of approximately a dozen for use particularly in Norway France and the Low Countries., 3. These proposals were put forward by O.S.S. in March last and submitted to ETOUSA for comments. It is understood that death of General Andrews has caused the delay. Comments of General D-vers have been received and are favourable. These comments and submission of the proposals by U.S. Chiefs of Staff show anxiety in every way tc meet wishes of British Chiefs of Staff in tnese matters S.O.E. representatives here assure us that present proposals unlikely to be objected to oy S.O.m. and may have been cleared already. Please confirm this. Shipment of men and equipment for this O.S S. project has been held up for considerable time pending its final approve1.  T.0.0. 312305Z Distribution Restricted  -2, COPYNO.  To2 Joint Staff Mission Froi'-i Chiefs of Straff Dated 9th Soptonber 1943 MOST SECRET  IMMEDIATE  Following fron Chiefs of Staff C.O.S. W 798. Reference J.S.M. 1147. ' Proposals in the nain appear unobjectionable  with certain linitations. Important questions arise concerning broader problems of co-ordination of clandestine air operations of S.I.S. S.O.E. and O.S.S. J.I.C. have accordingly been instructed to examine whole natter thoroughly and report is expected next week. Full reply to your telegram will then be made.  T.0.0. 091115Z Distribution  Restricted Major Pleybell-Bouverie, f  L  COPY NO.  To Chiefs of Staff From Joint Staff Mission Dated 9th September 1943 MOST SECRET ntPORTANT J.SiM 1166 Reference C.O.S. W 798.  Present position here is that U.S. Chiefs of Staff are not permitting O.S.S. to ship any men or materials to  U.K. in preparation for operations in Europe pending the approval by the British Chiefs of Staff of the plan referred to in J.S.M. 1147. 2. We have today seen Colonel Louis Franck from whom we understand that OVERLORD plan for implementation by S.O.E. and S.O. branch of O.S.S. has been approved by General Devers and COSSAC and that in order that รยง.0. branch of O.S.S. can play its part in this plan it will be necessary for O.S.S. personnel to arrive in England very shortly. 3. In view of the above may we inform U.S Chiefs of Staff that we should welcome action by O.S.S to implement the agreed OVERLORD plan. We would make it clear that this applies only to S.O. operations in western Europe i.e Holland Belgium and France. T.0.0. 092101Z Distribution  Restricted Major Pleydell-Bouverie, mmi  Glil ERAL DEANE.  With reference to your inquiry of 31st August concerning the cosaaents of the British Chiefs of Staff regarding operations proposed by O.S.S. in the European Theatre.  As far as can be seen there will be none but minor objections to the proposals that have been put forward. Important questions however arise concerning the jorder of problems of co-ordination of clandestine air operations of S.I.S. S.O.E. and O.S.S. An examina tion of the whole matter is therefore proceeding and a report is expected in about a week when a full reply can be made to you.  The desirability of clearing up this matter as quickly as possible is appreciated and has been  emphasised.  H. REDMAN Brigadier. 9th September. 1943, , copy no.  To Joint Staff Mission From War Cabinet Offices Dated 10th September 1943  MOST SECRET IMMEDIATE DOTEL 1237  if Reference J.S.M. 1166 para. 3  We think it would be wiser to withhold agreement to this proposal until J.I.C. here have considered whole question of O.S.S. penetration into Europe. They are due to report to Chiefs of Staff by  Tuesday 14th September.  T.0.0. 102150Z DISTRIBUTION  Secretariat  Major Leonard S.O.E., Tos Joint Staff Mission  Froms Chiefs of Staff  Dated 15th September 1943 MOST SECRET  IMMEDIATE  Following from Chiefs of Staff C.O.S. W 810.  Reference J.S.M. 1147.   1. Generally the proposals amount only to a formal note of natters already discussed and in substance agreed. 2. Reference paragraph 1 a we see no objection to OSS conducting S.I. operations in the Iberian Peninsula or in Germany but in view of the delicate position of the British S.I.S in Scandinavia France and Low Countries we view with misgivings any proposals to create independent OSS/SI organisations in those countries at this stage in the war. S.I.S. and J.I.C. feel strongly that OSS should not despatch S.I. agents except on agreement with S.I.S. in order to avoid crossing of lines and danger to security of both organisations 3. S.I.S. OSS and French SR have agreed a combined plan for creating a special S.I. organisation to assist COSSAC. This has been approved by the staffs of General Devers and General Morgan. The formal approval of the French is still awaited. 4. We concur in and support the proposals in 1 b 1 d and 2 regarding OSS/SO activities subject to the terms already agreed between SOE and OSS the main terms being a The field force shall continue to be treated as a single fifth column organisation to assist an invasion force whether British or American co-ordination being effected in London.  b In Poland and Czechoslovakia assistance and support to resistance groups shall continue to be provided through the Governments of those countries in London and O.S.S. London to concert measures with S.O.E. before giving any such assistance.  c Any operations in Norway are to be carried out through the Norwegian Collaboration Sommittee representing the Norwegian High Command and S.O.E. and O.S.S.  d In Germany there may be room for separate organisations but co-ordination is to be effected in London. 5. Reference paragraph 2. The arrangements for communication facilities have been agreed by S.O.E life do not yet know precisely the proposed function of the auxiliary operations groups though from their composition and training they appear to be of the nature of small airborne commands. The operation of such groups appears therefore to be outside the province of S.O.E. except in the case of Norway vfhere they have already been fitted into the general picture. It has also been agreed with COSSAC and O.S.S. London that a modified form of 0.S.S./S.O.E. Groups known as Jedburghs should be prepared for future operations. Steps are being taken to implement this decision., 6. The recent considerable increase in clandestine air operations required to be undertaken for S.I.S. S.O.E. and O.S.S. has led to pressure on Air Ministry so provide additional aircraft for these purposes 7. We have recently approved allocation of a total of 58 heavy aircraft and a United number of light aircraft for European theatres to meet these demands but are unable to consider a further increase at present. 8. This allocation cannot however meet the full requirements of S.O.E. and S.I.S. still less the likely increase in the needs of O.S.S. 9. In view above request U.S. Chiefs of Staff give consideration to allotment of U.S.A.A.F. aircraft and crews to meet O.S.S. air transport requirements.  'v--I  10. So far as clandestine sea transport is concerned the Admiralty is prepared to make available to O.S.S. the facilities provided to S.I.S. and S.O.E. by the irregular flotillas operated by the Royal Navy. 11. The security of all clandestine air operations and particularly of air landing or pick-up operations is largely dependent upon information regarding the measures taken by the enemy's counter-espionage services in various areas. This information which is derived from many sources is co-ordinated in London whore the headquarters of S.I.S. and S.O.E. are situated and where O.S.S. and other Allied Intelligence Services have established offices. 12. We do not consider that this centralisation of security control in London implies any interference with the right of European theatre commanders to indicate the type of intelligence they require. As regards S.O.E. Operations whether conjointly with O.S.S. or independent of it theatre commanders have in fact the authority to control and direct any such clandestine air operations in their theatres.  13. We are therefore strongly of the opinion that co-ordination of security arrangements for clandestine operations in the European theatre must be centralised in London. T.0.0. 151700Z Distribution Restricted Major Pleydell-Bouverie, C.0.S. 43 216th Meeting 0 ///4 15 9  3. OPERilTIONS BY O.S S. IN EUROPEAN TH TRE J.I.C. 43 379 0 FINAL   Previous reference 0 0 8. 43 311th Meeting 0 Minute 6  THE COMMITTEE had hefore them a report hy the Joint Intelligence Sub-Committee on proposals by the United States Chiefs of Staff for the employment of 0.S.S. in the European theatre and attaching a draft telegram to Washington.    THE COMMITTEE   a Took note with approval of the Report hy the Joint Intelligence Sub-Committee.  b Approved the terms of the draft telegram and instructed tha Secretary to arrange for its despatch./  JSM.1147 / Sent as COS W 810 , copy no o  To Chiefs of Ctaff From Joint Staff Mission Dated 22nd September 1943.  MOST SECRFT IMPORTANT  J.S.M. 1200 Reference J.S.M. 1147 and COS W 8lO.  Your COS W 810 contains no direct refer ence to O.S.S. proposal with regard to counter subversive and counter-intelligence activities by  O.S.S. referred to in J.S.M. 1147 paragraph 1 c . May we assume that you approve of O.S.S. undertaking these operations provided that they are centralised and co-ordinated in London this co-ordination in London being necessary for the reasons given in paragraphs 11 and 12 of your COS W 810 T.O.O. 2221572 Distribution  Restricted Major Bouverie, Il  CO  To Joint Staff Mission  Fro War Cabinet Offices  Dated 3rd October 19 3  MOST SECRET  IMPORTANT  COS W 892  Reference J.S 1200 '  y   lo Counter-intelli efice activities by O.S.S. referred to in J.S.IJ. 11 7 paragraph 1 c are accepted on condition that it is clearly understood that central co-ordination will be exercised by S I S in London where O.S.S. are represented In the COISAC theatres of operation S A.C. will direct policy 0 SoS. personnel in the field will be under command of the Army groups to which they are attached Channels of communication from those theatres by O.S S. personnel will be strictly limited to those controlled through S.I'.S. in London  2 As regards counter-subversive and counter intelligence activities in and from European theatre other than in the COSSAC operational area it is already accepted that central co-ordination rests with S.I S. in London.  3. The above refers only to O.S.S. role in counter-intelligence and counter-subversive work O.S.S so set-up in the invasion field may include  as in the case of S.O.E. attachment of trained 1 B officers for internal security of S.O. activities. O.S.S. officers attached in this way will be subject to arrangements as to command as in paragraph 1 above. Central co-ordination will be with S.O.E. in London where O.S.S. are represented and channels of communica tion will be limited to those controlled .through S.O.E. in London. T.0.0.0311452  Distribution  Restricted Major Pleydell-Bouverie, / Os THIS DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY OP HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY S GOVERNMENT  The circulation of this paper has been strictly limited. It is issued for the personal use oi I PST SECRET. Copy No. . . 2/  RD OGTOBUR 19.4.5 WAR CABINET CrllEES OP STi\PF COfflITTEE   CONTROL OF S.O.E. ACTIVITlEB IN. N m-- T JEgOgJ Memo rnr dun Jby. COSSAC . 1 At the meeting of the Chiefs of Staff held on 16th Seotemher 1943 C 0 S. 43 21 th Meeting O f Item 14 conclusion h I was instructed to prepare in o n consultation wi th S.O.E. proposals for the control oi S.O. . activities in NORTH-WEST EUROPE. I have duly consulted S.O.E and my proposals are given in the attached Annex. 2. It will be seen that reference is made to S.O.E./S.O S.O. is the UNITED STATES eequivalent ' of S.O.E.  Signed P.E. MORGAN. Lieutenant-General Chief of Staff to the Suprerne Commander  Designate . Offices of the War Cabinet S Wolop 3RD OCTOBER 1943. PROFOSnLS FOR CONTROL EV CQSSaC OF S.O.E./S.O.  ACTIVITIES IN NURTH-V/EST EUROPE SCOPE 1. COSSAC shall exercise operational control over S.O.E./S.O s activities in those occupied and enemy countries with which GOSSAC is operationally concerned namely JNGR.eii DLNlAiRJv HOLLAND BELGIUM LUXEMBOURG FRANCE and GERMANY. -1,   2 Subject to the limitations laid down in paragraphs 3 to 8   tbelow the control will oover all operations to be carried out by S.O.E./S.O. in the countries referred to above both before and after the invasion of the Continent based on the UNITED KINGDOM has taken place. It will include in relation to such operations   a General direction of planning  b Instructions as to target  c Direction from time to time of certain types of activity should be reduced or increased in order to conform with COSSAG s main plan.  d Direction as to the proportion to pre-D day and post-D day activities respectively. LIMIT..TIONS  3 The operational control to be exercised by COSSAC over S.O.E./ S 0.'s activities will be essentially on broad lines designed to ensure their conformity with the general strategy of GOSSAC s plans. It will NOT extend to the detailed clandestine methods whereby these activities are prepared and carried out.  4 It is NOT considered desirable to extend GOSS.iC s control sq as to cover administrative matters which will continue to be directed in accordance with present arrangements.  METHOD OF CONTROL    5 The existing liaison arrangements between GOSS.tG and S.O.E./S.O. will be maintained and it will not be necessary to increase HOSSAC s staff by the inclusion of any special section to deal specifically with subversive activities. The present system of liaison between COSS.iC and S.O.E./S.O. provides for   a Contact as and when necessary between COSSiiE and the senior members of his staff and CD and the Director of S.O.E.'s LONDON Group and S.O. representatives.  b The direction by COSS....G G Ops Branch of the Forward Planning Section of S.O.E./s.O. s LONDON Headquarters.  c Contact as and when necessary between the Intelligence Branch of GOSSAC s staff and the Forward Planning Section of S.O.E./S.O. s LONDON Headquarters. 6. GOSSxiC will continue to furnish S.O.E./S.O. with copies as necessary of papers on such projects as 'OVER] RD1 and R vNEIN' and will instruct S.O.E./S.O. to submit proposals for their participation in such operations. After consideration of these proposals COSSaC will issue to S.O.E./S.O. such directives as arc necessary.  S.O.E./S.O. will submit to OOSSAC all major proposals that roach them from whatever source in regard to pro-D day sabotage in the countries concerned. GOSSAG will after any necessary consultation with the relevant Ministry or Service Department instruct S.O.E./s.O. as to the general priority for such activities.   S.0- E./S.0 .  LONDON will send to COSSAC regularreports of thqir   KU.J-c 1 -   activities and the progress of their plans in implementation of COSSj.G S directives in  current activiti  r Vc -i itv.o -in radp-oort of OVERLORD and other kindred operations. These reports will b rendered shortly after the close or each moon period.  -2, 11 0 CONTROL OF G.O.E ACTIVITIES IN -WORTH VflDST EUROPE.  G Q S. 45 603 0' .1   Provlous Roforcncc C .0..S. 45 217th Meetinfi' O' . Mxnuto 14  THE COMMITTEE had before thorn a Memorandum by C0S3AO setting out 'proposals which had boon agreed with S 0 Ep for the control of the latter s activities in North West Europe  I SIR CHARLES PORTAL suggested that the interests of S.i.S should be safeguarded by the addition to the third sub- I paragraph of paragraph 6 of the Annex to COSSAG s Memorandum X I of the words   care being taken that S.I.S.' operations which have priority over those of S.O.E. in the North West  European area are not jeopardized.  THE COMMITTEE  Approved the proposals amended as at X above.  Offices of the War Cabinet S.W.l.  5TH OCTOBER 1943., A  U.3. fa ' wmimmmman   -'/  PROPOSED 0PERATI08S BY O.S.S. IS THE EUROPEAS THEATER  M ioraadurs by the Representatives of the British Chiefs of Staff  X V & aov raeelvocS the views of the British Chiefs of Staff m th proposed operations by o.S.S. in the European theat. h oh wore referred to the British Chiefs of Staff for their segments at the request of the U.S. Chiefs of Staff. The speelf1c proposals together with the cosaaents of the British Chiefs f staff are Hated below.   a .1. activities In the Scandinavian countries end m&amiwrope Ipcludlng the Iberian Peninsula. i he British Chiefs of Staff see no objection to O.S.S. coTi.iuftfctng S.X. operations In the Iberian Peninsula or In Oersum but. In view of the delicate position of the British  3. . la Scandinavia France and the Low Countries they view with Misgivings any proposals to create Independent O.S ./ . . organisations in those countries at this stage in thus war. They feel strongly that O.S.S. should not despatch S. . .roots except on agreeaeat with S.I.S. in order to avoid . the crosslag of lines and danger to security of both organl atia . S.I.S. and O.S.S. and French S.R. have agreed a  cwfetned plan for creating a special S.X..organisation to assist COBSAC. This has been approved by the Staffs of General Severs end General Morgan. The formal approval of the French Is still awaited.  b S.Q. activities In the Scandinavian countries and estern Europe Including the Iberian Peninsula lilted however .in the .Iberian Peninsula Sweden Finland and Switzerland toprellmlnary contact work. jhfl taMlstem of reasoyble facllltles for munl.cation and the gathering of Information useful to  operational Planning.  -1, MaH  tbm British Chiefs of Stuff eoaeur la and support tits  fem e proposal bj efc to the terns alreadj agreed hetveea ae4 O.S.S.j the aia terns beingt    l fbe field force shall eoatiaue to be treated as a stable fifth eolusta orgaaisatioa to assist as invasion tm-m whether British or Amerlean coordination being  IT ted in London Cl In Poland nod Czechoslovakia assistance and support to v.&Bistanoe groups shall continue to be provided through tfe C vemments of those countries in London and O.S.5. tm&m to concert aieasures with &.0.B before giving any  Ci.lt Any operations In Morvay are to be carried out the Borvegian Collaboration Conaittea representing the lorvmian High Cosraand and 8 0 H and O.S.S   iv In Oensany there may be room for separate organiza tions but coordination is to be effected in London  M British Chiefs of Staff concur in and support this pro to accordance with the S.O H /O.S.S.  the British Chiefs of Staff do not yet knov precisely thsr p pssed fuaetlon of the auxiliary operations groups. though frees their composition and training they appear to be f 1A nature of small airborne coamands. the operation of tmob groups appears therefore to be outside the province  S.OJI except in the case of Borvay vhere they have already  2, wmm mm mm  bmmn tat th gwmml picture. Zt has also bean agreed vs.w. and OSS London that a nodlfted fora of O.S.S./S.O.f . 9mvt&m knomi as jedburghs should be prepared for future  pereftioae. Steps are being taken to inplwseat this decision ft  tsm tlm Wam&mt.   i She eoimter-Intelligence activities bp 0.3.s. are  Sfte pted on condition that it Is clearly understood that oeutral coordination vlll be exercised bp S.Z.S. in London vhe re O.S.S. are represented. In the COSSAC theaters of  nations the Suprsme Allied Coisanander vill direct policy. o.s.& personnel In the field vill bo under coessand of the  W groups to which they are attached. Channels of camimicatlon fron those theaters by O.S.S. personnel will be strictly United to those controlled through b X S in London.  it As regards counter subversive and counter -intelligente activities in sued from the European theater other than in the COSSAC operational area it Is already accepted that central coordination rests with S.Z.S. in London..   iit the above refers only to the O.S.S. role La counter- IntelUgenoe Mid oounter-sdbverslve work. The O.S.S. set-up' In tte invasion field may include as in the case of S.O.S. attaeTiwt of trained Security officer for'internal se  ttri-ty of S.O. activities. O.S.S. officers attached in this way vill be subject to arrangements as to command as in paragraph 1 above. Central coordination will be with. .0.1. in London where O.S.S. are represented and  ibmmmtM of comunioation will be limited to those controlled through S.O.S. in London. Civ The security of all clandestine air operations and p-M Meularly of air landing or pick-up operations is largely 48p ndeat upon information regarding the measures taken by tte enemy s counter-espionage services in various areas. 5, fills Inforostlon which Is derived from many sources Is coordinated in Z ond m vhsrc the headquarters of S.I.S. and are situated and where O.S.S. and other Allied Intelli gence Services have established offices. She British Chiefs of Staff do act consider that this centralisation of security control in London implies any interference with the right of European theater oommaiiders to indicate the type of intelligence they require. As re garde & operation whether conjointly with O.S.S. or indepeadimt of it. theater eounanders have in fact the a.nMiovt%f to control and direct any such clandestine air operations in their theaters. She British Chiefs of Staff are therefore strongly of the opinion that coordination of security arrangements for cleadectine operations in the European theater mist he cen tralised in London.  2. the recent considerable increase in clandestine air operations required to be undertaken for S.I.S. S.0.1. and O.S.S. has led to pressure on the Air Ministry to provide ad1fi1 1I  The British Chiefs of ve recently approved allocation of a total of รยง8 heavy a limited number of light alreraft for European to meet these demands hut are unable to consider a This allocation cannot however full requirements of S.O E. and S.I.S..still less the  aircraft for these purposes.  increase at present.  likely increase in the needs of O.S.8. In view of the above tbs British Chiefs of staff request that the B.8. Chiefs of staff give consideration to the allotment of C.S.A.A.F. aircraft and  crow to wet O.S.S. air transport requirements., mm .รขโยข .mm So fmx 3 clandeetln a t encsport 1 cono med the Adait sty tfc. prepared to aeke available to 0.3 S. tbo fsollltte prwsdc t .1. . uwls.O.K. by the Irrogule flotillas operated by tb Stoyal dovy., MOST SECRET  CAPTAIN ROYAL  At the end of August General Deane put up a note asking if British approval could be obtained to the operations proposed by O.S.S. in the European Theatre. It has taken some time for this approval to come through but the attached paper gives the answer in detail to the various questions raised.  We had made it out initially as a C.C.S. paper but as Deane's query was made oh the Secretariat level it is perhaps best to Keep matters on that level.  H. REDMAN o-rAgeAUAtrr 9   Brigadier Secretary British Joint Staff Mission.  7th OctoberT 1943, Z  COPY MOST SECRET M.0.4. G.H.Q. OFFICER ONLY M.E.F.   \SY  Ref C0S/l6l/256  25.11.43  C.G.S. G.H.Q. M.E.F.  Copies to H.M. Ambassador to GREECE.  H.M. Ambassador to Jugoslavia. Mr. HAMILTON. Colonel LASCELLES. S.O.E. LONDON. SOE/OSS RELATIONS.  1.  a At Appendix A is a copy of a letter Major General GUBBINS has received from Brigadier General DONOVAN Head of OSS.  b At Appendix Bffis a copy of Major General GUBBINS' reply to Brigadier General DONOVAN. 2. Some months ago it was agreed that SOE and OSS should be separate but not independent departments carrying out subversive operations in the BALKANS. It was agreed that they should in fact be partners for these operations but that SOE should be the senior and predominating partner and as such the controller of operations. 3. During Brigadier General DONOVAN S recent visit to the SflDDLE EAST he has made it clear that at best he is only prepared to let OSS work under a very light SOE control and that when it suits him he intends by one means or another to disregard any such control. In fact at one stage he made it clear that he intended to be an equal partner for all operations into the BALKANS. 4. From time to time SOE have had instructions originally from the FOREIGN SECRETARY '' to limit the numbers of OSS personnel sent into the BALKANS more particularly to JUGOSLAVIA and GREECE. By one means or another SOE succeeded in doing this until recently. OSS have brought pressure to bear and have now after attempted but tactful SOE resistance obtained agreement and permission to send a further 30 personnel to JUGOSLAVIA and 15 to GREECE. We should make a great mistake if we conalude that OSS will be satisfied when these personnel have been sent into the BALKANS. Their past form has been to take many bites at the cherry and there is no reason to believe that this will be the last.  5. Again it has been made clear to SOE by Brigadier General DONOVAN that he is certainly not going to accept SOE control regarding policy. For instance he has already stated that he neither takes his orders from our FOREIGN OFFICE nor is he interested in their policy. He has also made it clear that he takes his orders solely from the Joint Cs. of S. and not from the State Department. As an example of this all the personnel he is now sending into GREECE are going to ELAS and not to EDES. His attitude is that he wishes his personnel to be with those elements in the BALKANS who are prepared to resist the AXIS and his intention is that AMERICAN personnel shall encourage this resistance with all their power. 6. The complications and embarrassments which will result from such action are obvious. In short we shall have an organisation in the BALKANS bound in no way to carry out the policy of HMG. 7. SOE cannot be expected to stand up to OSS in the MIDDLE EAST and attempt to control their operations and enforce adherence to the policy of HMG. Were SOE To attempt this spercussions in Western EUROPE and more particularly in INDIA and the Far East where SOE and OSS relations are even more delicate than in the MIDDLE EAST would be fatal. It should be remembered that SOE are not the so-called  senior partner in every area., 8. The time has clearly arrived when the issues must be faced and a definite understanding arrived at between our own FOREIGN OFFICE and the STATE Department. It should be realised that until there is such an understanding SOE cannot any longer without prejudice to world-wide subversive operations attempt any more to control 0S3. It is suggested therefore that the C in C or Cs in C may wish to inform Cs of S of tie present situation.   Signed C. Me V. GUBBINS Major General., APPENDIX A  OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES.  U.S. ARMY FORCES IN THE MIDDLE EAST. 20th November 1943.  My dear General Gubblns  1. Thank you for sending me the appraisal of the situation in Yugoslavia and Greece by Lt.Col. Budge. As a whole his recommendations for a joint mission seems to us proper but before ending in this mission it would appear desirable to have them meet with General Wilson and General Royce together with the heads of our respective organisations in the Middle East in order to ensure that the government policy by which each of us is controlled shall be fully explained and understood. 2. It is very gratifying to see your understanding of the needs of the situation here and of the importance of having our association in this Theater as close on Plans and Operations as it is in other Theaters. 3. The arrangement for the joint weekly meeting of our representatives the placing of S.I. and S.O. men on the Priority Board and your acceptance of our liaison officer in the R.A.F. traffic office should all make for more effective results. 4. Ihave learned that neither you nor we have a representative believe is called the Defence Committee. If we are to complete the tie-up we both should be represented. I have talked to General Royce about this and if you agree would you take steps to see if this can be accomplished 5. Itrust however that these are but steps in bringing more affirmative direction of subversive operations in the Balkans. There is an unusual opportunity through our joint efforts to give real support to military operations in other Theaters. I am sure you agree that this can be done only by closer supervision from here of the actual field operations in Yugoslavia Greece and Albania. 6. The strategic conception seems wise but the tactical fulfilment is sporadic and disconnected. To bring about a more coherent and integrated field effort I wish you would consider a joint recommendation by us that the laders of the various guerill a groups be invited to send authorised representatives to Cairo or Bari. If this were established we should have closer control over each guerilla chief so that in the event a particular chief should elect to traffic with /to him the enemy an ultimatum would/strengthen the position of our respective governments.  7. He have already discussed the possibility of the use of Operational Groups for island seizures and coup de mains. We should have such a group here very soon which after some special training in which I hope you will help us might be used experimentally on a small and simple scale to try out the idea -at least in reconnaissance of islands. 8. I am grateful for your assistance of the last few days in sending material and men into the Balkans. I am told by Lt.Col. Toulmin that he hopes soon to have in his hands additional supplies which he proposed to have shipped as soon as transport will be available. 9. We have kept General Royce fully informed and as you his fullest support. Thank you again for all your help and I hope we will soon meet in America.   SIGNED WILLIAM J. DONOVAN.  Major General C.McV. Gubbins D.S.O. M.C. Director S.O.E., APPENDIX BW.  Letter from Jajor General GUBBINS to Brigadier General DONOVAN.  My dear General DONOVAN  As the BALKANS are the operational theatre of the C in C. MIDDLE EAST and as M.0.4-isunder the direct operational control of the C in C it is from him that operational instruction for action in the BALKANS is received. I feel therefore that if there is any question of government policy as between our two governments requiring co-ordination then this should be done on the highest level and not locally.  As however this is a matter outside my competence I am referring it tothe CinC.  2. Regarding representation on the MIDDLE EAST Defence Committee M.0.4. is of course represented by the C in C in person but I have no doubt that should any matter arise which particularly concerned you he would arrange for an OSS representative to attend. 3. In paragraph 6. you refer to the exfiltration of guerilla leaders. As you know we have already had in CAIRO certain of the GREEK leaders and hope that in the near future a military delegation from PARTISAN territory will arrive with whom you and ourselves can discuss operational and supply matters. As you wifell know the whole BALKAN field bristles with political difficulties M.0.4-is concerned solely with carrying out an operational policy decided upon  been and given to it after all considerations have/taken into account by those concerned. I think you will find that at the weekly SOE/OSS meetings we shall be able to thrash mut matters to our mutual satisfaction.  4. As regards the training of your Operational Groups I shall be delighted to assist in any way possible and have told my training officers to discuss details with yours. I suggest that your OSS fiepresentative should approach Brigadier DAVY the DM0 bd discuss the help he may be able to give you in the training of operational groups for infiltration into the BALKANS.  Signed C. Me V GUBBINS. '  25th November 1943., 53  U.S. SECRET COPY NO BRITISH MOST SECRET C.C S. 449 28 December 19 3  COMBINED CHIEFS OF STAFF  ACTIVITIES OF O.S.S. IN EUROPEAN THEATER  Reference a. Memo from Representatives of the British Chiefs of Staff 7 October 19 3.  Memorandum from the U.S. Chiefs of Staff  1. After careful consideration of the contents of reference memorandum the U.S. Chiefs of Staff desire-to inform the British Chiefs of Staff that they are not in complete accord with the views set forth therein. 2. The U.S. Chiefs of Staff are of the opinion that the interests of both nations will be better served by the continua tion of independent operations by the O.S.S. under the control and direction of the Commanding General U.S Forces in the European Theater whose responsibility it is to effect the necessary coordination with the corresponding British agencies. The British S.I.S. and S.O.E. in discharging their responsibility to the British Chiefs of Staff under appropriate British direction likewise are afforded independence of operations. It is our view that complete reliance must be placed in these agencies to effect coordination among themselves in good faith and on a common sense basis. 3. In this connection and referring to paragraph 1 a of subject memorandum it should be noted that activities of the Office of Strategic Services in the Iberian Peninsula are under the control and direction of the Commanding General U.S. Army Forces North Africa., MOST SECRET COPY 10 M.M. S 43 36. 29TH 194 .  BRITISH JOINT STAFF MISSION IN WaSHINGTON  ACTIVITIES OF 0.3.S . IN EJROP aN THFaTRE  R forencai C.C.S 449 /'  Note by thu oocrctarv  I attach herewith for information a copy of a memorandum sent to the Secretary U.S Chiefs of Staff in reply to a memorandum See J.S.M. 1147 vith regard to 0 S S. activities in the European theatre.  The matter \ s referred to London in J.S.M 1147 and the reply to the N.S Chiefs of Staff Annex was based on the views of the British Chiefs of Staff as contained in C. 0 e. I1 ' 79o blO and 852.  It is proposed that C.C S. 449 should be discussed with the S.O.E. representative in Washington before referring it to the British Chiefs of etaff for their comments.   Signed H. REDMAll  Washington .C. 29th December. 1947, U. S. SECRET BRITISH MOST SECRET PROPOSED ftPBR-ATT0NS-B 0.S.S. IR THE ETJHDPE5.]TTHEATER  44eaorandurflReprosentativd& &P' tho British Chiefs of S-taPP   1. We have now received the views of the British Chiefs of Staff on the proposed operations by 0 S.S in the European Theater which were referred to the British Chiefs of Staff for their comments at the request of the U.S. Chiefs of Staff. The specific proposals together with the comments of the British Chiefs of Staff are listed below.  a S.I. activities in the Scandinavian countries and Western Europe including the Iberian Peninsula. The British Chiefs of Staff see no objection to O.S.S. conducting S.I. operations in the Iberian Peninsula or in. Germany but in view of the delicate position of the British  S.I.S. in Scandinavia France and the Low Countries they view with misgivings any proposals to create independent O.S.S /S.I organizations in those countries at this stage in the war. They feel strongly that O.S.S. snould not despatch S.I. agents except on agreement Yfith S.I.S. in order to avoid the crossing of lines ana-danger to security of both organ izations. S.I.S. and O.S.S. and French S.R. have agreed a combined plan for creating a special S.I organization to assist COSSAC. This has been approved by the Staffs of General Devers and General Morgan. The formal approval of the French is still awaited.  b S .0. activities in the Scandinavian couiitnes and Western Europe including the IbeiTarT Peninsula limited however in tho Iberian Peninsula Sweden Finland and Switzerland to preriminary contact work the establishment of reasonable facilities for communi cation and the gathering of information useful to operational planning., U. SSECRET BRITISH MOST SECRET The British Chief's of Staff concur in and support the above proposal subject to the terms already agreed between  S.O.E. and O.S.S. the main terms beings i The field force shall continue to be treated as a single fifth column organization to assist an invasion force whether British or American' coordination being effected in London.  ii In Poland and Czechoslovakia assistance and support to resistance groups shall continue to be provided through the Governments of those countries in London and O.S.S. London to concert measures with S.O.E. before giving any such assistance  iii Any operations in Norway are to be carried out through the Norwegian Collaboration Committee representing the Norwegian High Command and S.O.E. and O.S.S.  iv In Germany there may be room for separate organiza-tions but coordination is to be effected in London.  c Training within the European theater of O.S.S. operatives British Chiefs of Staff concur in and support this pro posal in accordance with the S.O.E./O.S.3. agreement.   d The establishment and operation by O.S.S. of communica tion facilities subject to the provisions of certain understandings arrived at in January 1941 betvi/een O.S.S. S.O.E. and the Controller of Special Communications The arrangements for communication facilities have been agreed with S.O.E. The despatch to the European theater of Auxiliary Operations Groups to the number of approximately 12 for use particularly in Norway France and the Low Countries. The British Chiefs of Staff do not yet know precisely  the proposed function of the auxiliary operations groups though from their composition and training they appear to be of the nature of small airborne commands. The operation of such groups appears therefore to be outside the province of S.O.E except in the case of Norway where they have already been fitted, U. 8. SECRET BRITISH MOST SECRET into the general picture. It has also been agreed with COSSAC and OSS London that a modified form of O.S.S./S.O.E. Groups known as jedburghs should be prepared for future operations. Steps are being taken to implement this decision.   f Counter subversive activities in the areas referred to . in b above and counter-intelligence measures in and from the Theater.  i The counter-accepted on condition that it is clearly understood that central coordination will be exercised by S.I.S. in London where O.S.S are represented. In the COSSAC theaters of operations the Supreme Allied Commander will direct policy. O.S.S. personnel in the field will be under command of the Army groups to which they are attached. Channels of communication from those theaters by O.S.S. personnel will be strictly limited to those controlled through S.I.S. in London.  ii As regards activities in and from the European theater other than in the COSSAC operational area it is already accepted that central coordination rests with S.I.S. in London.  iii The above refers intelligence and counter-subversive work. The O.S.S. set-up in the invasion field may include as in the case of S.O.E. attachment of trained Security officers for internal security of S.O. activities. O.S.S. officers attached in this way will be subject to arrangements as to command as in paragraph  i above. Central coordination will be with S.O.E. in London where O.S.S are represented and channels of communication will be limited to those controlled through S.O.E. in London  iv The security particularly of air landing or pick-up operations is largely dependent upon information regarding the. measures taken by 3, u. b. SBCHST BKI1'15il MUST SECRET the enemy's counter-espionage services in various areas. This information which is derived from many sources is coordinated in London where the headquarters of S.I.S. and  S.O.E. are situated and where G.S.S. and other Allied Intelligence Services have established offices. The British Chiefs of 1 taff do not consider that this centralization of security control in London implies any interference with the right of European theater commanders to indicate the type of intelligence they require. As regards S.O.E. operations whether conjointly with O.S.S. or independent of it theater commanders have in fact the authority to control and direct any such clandestine air operations in their theaters.  The British Chiefs of Staff are therefore strongly of the opinion that coordination of security arrangements for clandestine operations in the European theater must be centralized in London  2. The recent considerable increase in clandestine air operations required to be undertaken for S.I.S. S.O.E. and O.S.S. has led to pressure on the Air linistry to provide additional aircraft for these purposes. The British Chiefs of Staff have recently approved allocation of a total of 58 heavy aircraft and a limited number of light aircraft for European theaters to meet these demands but are unable to consider a further increase at present. This allocation cannot however meet the full requirements of B.O.E. and S.I.S. still less the likely increase in the needs of O.S.S. In view of the above the British Chiefs of otaff request that the U.S. Chiefs of Staff give cons deration to the allotment of U.S.A.A.E. aircraft and crews to meet O.S.S. a 1 r transport reqnirements.  r 4 f, U. S. SECRET BRITISH MOST SECRET 3. So far as clandestine sea transport is concerned the Admiralty is prepared to make available to O.S.S. the .facilities provided to S.I.S. and S.O.E. by the irregular flotillas operated by the Royal Navy  7th October 194-3.   5  4, OPERATIONAL PRIORITY  Proa Algiers Toi WAR No. WS141/22730 NAF 573 2 January 1944 To AGWAR for Coabined Chiefs of Staff rptd OSFOR for British Chiefs of Staff Mideast from AFHQ BNAF signed Eisenhower cite FBGCT 9141/22730 021530. This is my NAF 573.  Para 1. Following is paraphrase of Mideast message 0/34135 dated 31 Dec from COS to Freedom for Eisenhower.  Para 1. Recently showed SOE Cairo by General Donovan head OSS was a memorandum proposing to negotiate withdrawal of Bulgaria from War through fCuyiiffiJiissci former Bulgarian banker by using his acquaintanceship in court Government and Army Circles.  Para 2. Political advisers Mideast consider most unwise since certain elements Bulgaria organising active resistance to regime wsuld b alienated by attempt removal Bulgaria from far by proposed method Present non representative Government unlikely survive Bulgaria collapse. Since we demand unconditional surrender such negotiations much more likely delay rather than accelerate collapse.  Para 3. Understand mission under Kuyuajliskl now in Istanbul. Under new directive you are responsible for subversive activities Bulgaria In view paragraph 2 above suggest all action this matter be suspended until all concerned have considered fully. lour instructions appreciated.  Para 4. Political question not discussed with OSS Cairo as understand OSS Istanbul still operates on Washington directives.n  CMIN-1104 2 Jan 44, Pag 2.  Fro j Algiers Tot 1AR No. W9141/22730 NAF 575 2 January 1944 Para 2. Whilst appreciating that every suitable course leading to removal of Bulgaria from the far should be pursustd it is requested that this Hq be consulted and kept informed concerning any negotiations conducted with individuals or Governments falling within its sphere of responsibility. It is requested that you so instruct General Donovan if he is in fact conducting such negotiations.  Para 3. Our recommendations will follow shortly.  No Sig.  CM-IN-1104 2 Jan 44 2 SQZ, MOST SECRET  M M S 4-4 1  COPY NO  3rd January 1944  BRITISH JOINT STAFF MISSION IN WASHINGTON  ACTIVITIES OF O.S.S. IN EUROPEAN THEATRE Previous ref. M.M S d3 36 fI  Note by the Secretary  The attached draft signal to the British Chiefs of Staff has been prepared in consultation with the representative of S.O.E. and is cir culated herewith for consideration.  It is proposed that this matter should be placed on the Agenda for the Meeting to be held on Thursday 6th January 1944 and that'Lieut..Colonel Fleyde Bouverie should be invited to attend.   Signed H. REDMAN  WASHINGTON D.C. 3rd January 1944., This mossage must be thorou hly paraphrased if its t..xt is to be published or communicated outside British or American services or departments. If re-transmitted unparaphrased other than through holders of Shiefs of Staff cypher settings the originator must marl-the message to be sent on One Time Pad.  COPY NO Tos Chiefs of Staff From Joint Staff Mission Dated 29th December 194-3. MOST SECBBT.  J.S.M.  Reference C .0.o. 8l0 and 892.  The contents -of these two telegrams were put to the U.3 Chiefs of Staff in a memorandum copy by.bag . They have now replied as follows BSGINSs After careful consideration of the contents of refe ence memorandum the U.S Chiefs of Staff desire to inform the British Chiefs of Staff that they are not in corulete accord with the views set forth therein.  The U.S. Chiefs of Staff are of the opinion that the interests of both nations will be better served by'the continuation of independent operations by the O.S.S under the control and direction of the Commanding General U.S. Forces in the European Theater whose responsibility it is to effect the necessary coordination with the corresponding British agencies. The British S.I.S. and S.O.E. in disc. larging their responsibility to the British Chiefs of Staff under appropriate British direction likewise are afforded independence of operations. It is our view that complete reliance must be placed in these agencies to effect coordination among themselves in-good faith and on a common sense basis.  In this connection and referring to Paragraph 1 a of subject memorandum it should be noted that activities  -1, of the Office of Strategic Services in the Iberian Peninsula are under the control and direction of the Commanding General U.S Amy Forces North Africa MBS.  2 As you will see the U.S. Chiefs of Staff do not comment on your detailed views but ru-onphasize their previous opinion that O.S.S. operations should remain under the control and direction of the U.-c . Commanding General in a  Theatre even if there is a British Supreme Commander or it is a theatre of British stratagic responsibility.-The U.S Commanding General is responsible for co-ordinating with the ap-pr-opriate British agency whether S.I.S. or S.O.E.  3. Wo should line to know whether you consider it worth while to endeavour onm and for all to clarify the principles under which S.O.E and O.S.S should operate in both combined theatres and U.S or British theatres. 4. 'We would suggest that wo should put forward to the U.S. Chiefs of Staff a short xiper asking for their concurrence to the following principle  in a combined or joint theatre both O.S.S. and S.O.E should operate under the control and direction of the Theatre Command be he British or American The method whereby the  / operations of O.S.d. and. S.O.E. are controlled and integrated will be the responsibility of the theatre commander concerned.  5. You will appreciate that certain difficulties may arise in connection with S.I.S for while the S.I. side of O.S.S. is also under the control of the U.S. Tho'atiw Commander we understand th.-.t this is not tin case with regard to our own S.I.S. operations If therefore this agreement is confined to S.O. only difficulties nay arise sinoe Donovan's ideas of the dividing line botwo. n S.O and S.I. operations are not necessarily the sane as our own fend ho may -2, undertake operations in a theatre vith his S.I. personnel which we should regard as more properly S.O. operations and therefore only to be underta en with the approval of the Theatre Commander. 6 Wo imagine5 however that it would not be politically acceptable to us for 8.I.S. to be controlled by anyone but the Foreign Office and you may feel it necessary to accept the difficulties mentioned above and to limit any agreement to the control of S.O.E . and the S.0t. side of Donovan's activities in' any theatre of operations. 7 The above has been drafted in consultation with  S. O.E.'S -representative here. T.0.0  Distribution, /V 7 j   T  COPY OF TELEGRAM RECEIVED FROM LONDON DATED JAMUARY 5TH. 1944  Reference your telegram of January 1st.  1. US JCS appear to be working upon out of date information in that they do not seem to be aware that London  N.W. Europe -groups of SOE/OSS are in fact already integrated and that this system has now been in satis factory operation for nearly two months. 2. In COS W 810 paragraph 4A it was laid down that quote field operations shall continue to be treated as a single joint organisation unquote. This sentence was taken direct from 194-2 SOE/OSS agreement. 3. It is clearly impossible to adopt any other attitude since OSS have no OSS as opposed to SOE Resistance Groups in Europe and Cossac for which group works is already an integrated Headquarters. 4.. It therefore became clear that integration was in fact the only solution and it has beencarried through most successfully by Brigadier Mockler Ferryman and Colonel Haskell OSS . There are now OSS officers in every section of London Group and Colonel Haskell acts as Brigadier Mocfcler Ferryman s deputy presiding at meetings etc. in his absence.  5. It is clear that any attempt to undo this arrangement would be a retrograde step and result in considerable inconvenience and increase of work to Cossac. We hcype that General Eisenhower may telegraph US JCS in this sense. His views on the subject are clearly from Cairo s Alpha 178 of January 2nd which is repeated to you in my immediately following telegram. COPY OF TELEGRAM RECEIVED FROM LONDON DATED JANUARY 5TH. 1944  Herewith repeat of telegram Alpha 178 to Major General Gubbins from Major General Stawell dated January 2nd.  -   1. Following is Summary of telegram now received by us and dated December 26th from Freedom signed Eisenhower to Royce No. 20908. Summary begins  Subject your approval propose submit the following to  /Agwar, A. B. D. E. F  G. H. /V sy7 %  -2-6  Agwar reference Agwar 5455 of December 22nd.  OSS/SO activities in the Middle East quote should be under direct operational command of Force 133 unquote which is responsible for sustaining Resistance Movements in the Balkans including Hungary Roumania and Bulgaria  and for subversive activities in Turkey. Operational demands will be equated through Force 133 with long term political considerations under the direction of Middle East.  OSS/SO should operate directly under USAFIME which reports direct to Agwar.  Balkan Mission should for the present be quote handled by Force 133 unquote.  Commander of Force 133 should effect Balkan support under  control of C-in-C Middle East. This policy is subject  to review.  U.S. military personnel in Turkey should be controlled for the present by USAFIME. Except for any specific tasks allotted them by Agwar  USAFIME should be under operational command Middle. East  Summary ends 'G'  Royce and Toulmin are prepared to accept this though former has not yet replied since General Donovan expected here today and Toulmin will naturally refer matter to him. Eisenhowerfs suggestion clearly amounts to complete integration of Force 133 and OSS/SO and I therefore imagine General Donovan will oppose it heartily.  Meanwhile Mann G. 3 A.F. Headquarters arrived here today to discuss Islands and refugees about which I am tele graphing you separately. From him I gather A.F. Head quarters are determined to deal with only one organization supporting guerillas in Balkans and to put OSS/SO under  Force 133.  As General Donovan may take suggestion up with US JCS  direct please inform our Washington Mission in order that  that may put JSM in picture.  Herewith information referred to in my paragraph 3 of Alpha 178.  /i, N&47 &Z iC 7  -3   1. Partisan wounded and refugees are being evacuated from Dalmatian Islands by Yugoslav land force 133 ships. Wounded may amount to 2 000 and refugees up to 20 000. 2. Brigadier Miles considers this evacuation essential to facilitate defence of Vis. Retention of this Island is vital for distribution of stores by sea to Yugoslavia 3. A.F. Headquarters are not prepared to accept more than 4 000 refugees in Heel unless there is onward movement by M.E. M.E. have agreed with reluctance to accept up to ceiling figure of 20 000. I have instructed Miles to do bis utmost to discourage evacuation beyond this point., -6.1.44  M.M. S 44 Ist- g. 2. ACTIVITIES OF O.S.S . IN ININ ElBOlEu. THEATHE TT E COMMITTEE were reminded of the circumstances leading up to the J.S. Chiefs' of Staffs statement of their views with regard to the activities of the O.S.S. in the European Theatre contained in C.C.S. 449.  COLONEL PLEYDELL-BOUVERIE explained that the United States counterparts of both S C.E. and 3.1 S were coordinated as one organisation O.S.S. under General Donovan. He believed that General Donovan1s objection to integration of O.S.S. with the corresponding British organ isation in the theatre applied not so much to the S.O. side of the organisation as to the S.I. side and in this connection it must be remembered that General Donovan's  S.I. organisation undertook tasks which the Britis would consider as more properly falling to the S C organisation. In Western Europe the present positionwas satisfactory since S.O.E. and the S.O. side of O.S.S. were working as one team under the control of COSSAC. In any agreement reached with the Americans it must be borne in mind that under the American system the whole of O.S.S. was controlled by the TJ.S. Commander and not only the S.O. side whereas under the British system S.I.S. was controlled by the Foreign Office. THE COMMITTEE then considered the draft telegram contained in M.M. S 44 1 and certain amendments vtere agreed. THE COMMITTEE -   Instructed the Secretary to despatch the  telegram contained in M.M. S 44 1 as  amended in the course of discussion., A 23 Vn. -   'j OKo \A' %  ryxJ   k2 rt  r t  Gt-V'  O L  6  f\ h V &U ts  n, \\ffi T  This message must be thoroughly paraphrased if its text is to be  published or communicated outside British op American services or  departments. If re-transmitted unparaphrased other than through  holders of Chiefs of Staff cypher settings the originator must  mark the message to be sent on One Time Pad'.  COPY NO  To-s Chiefs of Staff From Joint Staff Mission MOST SECRET Dated 7th January 19 -4. l\  J.S.M. 1196 q y ' Reference COS W 810 and 852. The contents of these two telegrams were put to the U.S Chiefs of Staff in a memorandum copy by bag . They have now  replied as follows  BEGINS  After careful consideration of the contents of reference memorandum the TJ.S. Chiefs of taff desire to inform the British Chiefs of Staff that they are not in complete accord with the views set forth therein.  The U.S. Chiefs of Staff are of the opinion that the interests of both nations wi31 be better served by the continuation of independent operations by the O.S.S. under the control and dir ection of the Commanding General TJ.S. Forces in the European Theater whose responsibility it is to effect the necessary co ordination with the corresponding British agencies. The British  S.I.S. and S.O.7 . in discharging their responsibility to the British Chiefs of Staff under appropriate British direction like wise are afforded independence of operations. It is our view that complete reliance must be placed in these agencies to effect coordination among themselves in good faith and on a common sense basis. In this connection and referring to paragraph 1 a of subject memorandum it should be noted that activities of the Office of Strategic Services in the Iberian Peninsula are under the control and direction of the Commanding General TT.S Army Forces North Africa. ENDS. -1, , 5. You will appreciate that certain difficulties may arise in connection with S.I.S. for while the S.I. side of O.S.S. is also under the control of the U.S. Theatre Commander we under stand that this is not the case with regard to our own S.I.S. operations. If therefore this agreement is confined to S.O. only difficulties may arise since Donovan's ideas of the divid ing line between 0. and S.I. operations are not necessarily the same as our own and be may undertake operations in a theatre with his S.I. personnel which we should regard as more properly S.O. operations and therefore only to be undertaken with the approval of the Theatre Commander. To meet this point v e have used the definition O.S.S. less that part of it dealing purely with the collection of intelligence rather than O.S.S./S.O.  6. The above has been drafted in consultation with S.O.E.'s representatiYe here T.0.0. 072355Z Distribution  Restricted  /  Col. Phydell-Bourene, COPY NO  To War Cabinet Offices From Joint Staff Mission Dated 8th January 1944. SECRET  IMPORTANT LETOD 1665  Reference JtS.M. 1396.  Our memorandum referred to in para. 1 is contained in M.M S 43 3o which you should by now have received.  T.0.0. 081501Z 1 Distribution Secretariat., Copies to J.S.M- Colonel Douverie Addressed to Uas iington telegram Ko.210 of January B%h repeated to Minister of State Cairo. ffl.nlsfcer of telegram No. 28. tate Resident at Cairo's How that the matter has been.referred to Combinod Chiefa of St&ff IAF 575 you. should take the matter up with the State Department on basis of lay telegram Ho. 8796. 2. I hope it will -be possible to settle the question satisfactorily without at this stage going into the whole question of what reorganization is necessary as a result of unified Mediterranean Command see paragraph 2 of my telegram Ko. 8964 . Should the question however be raised by the State Department you should reply that you hope shortly to be in a position to discuss t at problem. 672, THIS DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY OF HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY S GOVERNMENT 2& The circulation of this paper has been strictly limited. It is issued for the personal useof.  BWOST SECRET. Copy No.h%  0.0.S. 44 54 0  21ST JANUARY. 1944  WAR CABINET  CHIEFS OP STAFF COMMITTEE  S.O.E. ACTIVITIES IN GREECE Cow of letter dated 22 .January 1944 from the Foreign Office to the Secretary ' cTTiefs of Staff Committee  R 959/9/ G  XXX  You will no doubt have seen our telegram to Leeper No. 34 of the 18th January a copy of which I enclose for convenience about our policy towards the Greek guerillas  during the next three months.  For the reasons given in this telegram we feel that the plan3 drawn up by force 133 and approved by the S.O.C. in Cairo is open to serious political objections. We realise however the urgent need for further aircraft for sending supplies into Greece if the Greek resistance movement is not to be disintegrated by famine in the coming all-important months. The Secretary of State would therefore be most grateful if the Chiefs of Staff could consider the Cairo plan and our comments on it as contained in the telegram to Leeper. From the political point of view you will see that we should like to see arrangements made which would make it possible for the present guerilla strength to be maintained and for guerilla activity against the Germans to continue until the final operation of NOAH S ARK is undertaken.  You will have seen the four telegrams which have just been received from Leeper Nos. 38 to 4r and it is evident from these that negotiations between E.D.E.S. and E.L.A.S. for.a settlement of the civil war may start very shortly. It is important therefore that our own plans for dealing with the guerillas once unity has been achieved should also be worked out as soon as possible. We should be grateful therefore i you could treat this matter as one of urgency. xxx  OflPlecs of the War Cabinet S.Wel   Signed O.G. SARGENT. 21ST JANUARY 1944.  Annex I nAnnex II /Annex III IV V and VI.  1, ANNEX I.  Copy of a telegram dated 18th January 1944 from Foreign Office to His Majesty's Ambassador to the Greek Coverrime'nt Cairo '  No. 34  IMMEDIATE  MOST SECRET  Your telegram No. IS and. Minister of State's telegram No. 82 Pilot /of 9th January and 11th January policy towards Greece/  I see very serious political disadvantages in S.O.E s plan for the guerillas in next three-months. Although plan does not contemplate complete abandonment of the resistance movement it appears to envisage a reduction of about forty per cent in the number of guerillas now under arms. Many of the objections to the complete abandonment of the guerillas which were put forward in my telegrams Nos. 304 and 310 would in my view apply with almost equal force to the drastic reduction in their numbers suggested in the S.O.E. plan.  2. An even more serious disadvantage to the plan is that it apparently advocates an almost completely inactive role for the guerillas during January February and March. This is open to the following objections a It is of great importance that we should carry the Soviet Government with us in our policy towards Greece but it is unlikely that we shall convince them of the need for a passive role for the guerillas  b We are holding out hopes of a new plan for the guerillas if they become reconciled. They may well feel disappointed and dissatisfied when they realise that this plan entails substantial demobilisation and that they are to get little or no ammunition or supplies  c If the guerillas remain inactive fresh causes of dissension are sure to arise. The only effective way of preventing a renewed outbreak of civil war is to keep them employed against the enemy. 3 I accept view as stated in plan that for operational purposes guerilla bands are played out and I realise that with the resources at present available we may be unable to maintain a rmre extensive scale of resistance than is contemplated in the plan. -But that is not a reason why His Majesty s Government should take the initiative in reducing the guerilla bands as contemplated in the plan. Circumstances may bring about such a reduction but it is quite another thing that His Majesty s Government should publicly recommend it For them to do so would be interpreted generally as showing that we had despaired of the policy hitherto advocated by us of organising resistance in Greece and when known as it would be it might produce widespread repercussions throughout the  Balkans.  2,  4 I realise that the sorties to Greece at present possible are quite inadequate' in order to maintain the flow  of supplies of material and foodstuffs to the guerillas. Question of increasing the number of aircraft at present available for sending supplies into Greece has already been taken up by Defence Committee and I am also referring the matter to Chiefs of Staff.' I hope we shall thus be able i to prevent a drastic reduction in the present guerilla strength ii to allow of increased guerilla activity during the preparatory period before Noah s Arki   OTP  ANNEX II.  APPRECIATION AND PLAN FOR NOAH S ARK  Ref. Map 1/1.000 000 -Greece  INTRODUCTION  1. NOAH'S ARK is the code name given phase III of the military policy now to be adopted by the Greek guerilla movements This policy falls into three phases -   PHASE I.-Cessation of the Civil War which will  facilitate PHASES II and III 1 PHASE II The preparatory period before PHASE III. PHASE III. NOAH'S ARK. This paper deals with PHASES II and III  OBJECT  2. The main object of NOAH'S ARK Phase III will be to so harass the withdrawal of German troops from Crete the Islands and Greece that formations and units will be unable to go into battle on other fronts without considerable re-organisation training and re-equipping. CONSIDERATIONS 3i Capacity of the Guerilla Forces It is beyond the capacity of guerilla forces to prevent the withdrawal but it is within their capacity to   a Provide safe harbour for sabotage groups while they reconnoitre and blow up VPs such as road and railway bridges telephone exchanges etc on the main line of withdrawal   b Harass troops and repair gangs who attempt to repair the damage  c Turn the withdrawal from a peaceful move into a tactical operation. -3, 4 Timing  In deciding v/hen NOAH'S ARK should take place the following considerations must be borne in mind   a The guerilla movement is almost played out and requires a rest.  b The next three or four months will be hard enough for the civilian population without the guerillas calling down heavy reprisals on them in addition. - o Irritants in the form of continuous guerilla activity will make the Germans take extra precautions and made it more difficult to carry out reconnaissances.   d The Germans will almost certainly thin out their L. of G.-units on the mainland before starting to evacuate the Iron Ring. The psychological moment to strike with all our resources will be when the thinning out process has been completed and the fighting troops have started to withdraw. It is impossible accurately to forecast the date but 30th March should be taken as the target date for completion of plans .  5 . Targets.  At Appendix is a map showing the main target areas and how it is proposed the guerillas should be re-organised to fit in with them.  The Allied Mission will harbour within these guerilla areas and carry out reconnaissances now with a view to action at a later date.  With a few exceptions it is not possible to pinpoint targets until these reconnaissances have been carried out. They have already started.  Certain targets can only be attacked by sabotage from within. These will not be related to guerilla areas but cells are now being created which will be able to co-operate at the time of NOAH S ARK. Some examples of this type of target are   a PIRAEUS Earbour  b German H.Qs in ATHENS.  e ATHENS Airfields  d LAMIA and I0ENINA telephone exchanges.  e Counter sabotage of MARATHON Dam etc. 6 ' Allied Military Mission  Experience has shown that it is the Allied officers and N C.0s. with a very small backing of trusted guerillas who actually get results. The guerilla hordes are only fit for noises off and harassing operations.  %ot attached. Copy will be available at the Meeting., If NOAH'S ARK is to get maximum results it is important that all demolitions are done more or less simultaneously. This results in the enemy being dispersed and the repair organisations swamped.  In order to do this a large number of sabotage groups are required and it is therefore undesirable that any useful member of the Allied Mission should be evacuat ed now but there is no reason why they should not be concentrat ed so as to make their maintenance easier during the reconnaissance.period  7. Command. The system of unified command as it stands at present is unsatisfactory because it is based on the understanding that there is a Joint G.H.Q. where the heads or representatives of each guerilla movement meet and discuss plans. This has not been possible for the last three months and is not likely to be possible again.  The following system of Command is therefore desirable -   The Three main areas of guerilla activity i.e.  Mainland ELAS ZERVAS  PELOPONNESE  should all be controlled direct from Cairo and receive orders  through a Senior Allied L.O.  Colonel Woodhouse and Major Wines will then be freed to tour the whole country and co-ordinate the personnel of the Mission as well as give advice to each Area Commander. Their most important task would be to smooth out minor differences of opinion which are bound to arise between ELAS ZERVAS and EKJCA and ke ep Cairo informed of events in an unbiased way such as would be impossible if they were attached exclusively to one faction or the other.  8. Intelligence and M.I.9. With the exception of the PELOPONNESE the Allied Mission layout as proposed in this Paper will cover all requirements including Intelligence and M.I.9 but NOAH'S ARK will predominate.   in the PELOPONNESE there are no vital target areas and the Intelligence requirements become predominant. The suggested layout is shown at Appendix Bt and it will be noted that it is very similar to that of the other Missions.  9. Supplies Supplies fall into two categories   a Supplies for Allied Mission and the guerillas in their immediate vicinity.  b Relief for the civilian population.  Not attached.  -5, I It is hoped that a lar 'e proportion or the guerillas will be able to disband and go home to sow next year's crop and so relieve next year s food shortage. The remaining guerillas estimated at 10 to 15 thousand will either not be able to go home because they are too compromised or will be required to stay to provide safe harbours for the Allied Mission and the nucleus of the guerilla movement required to be resuscitated in Phase III  The most important thing these guerillas will need will be boots and clothing and in some areas food. The amount of relief that can be carried out will be very small owing to the great shortage of aircraft sorties for Greece. A balance will have to be struck between all requirements within the limits of sorties available which is 21 sorties for each of January and February. It is not possible to say how many sorties will be available in March but a substantial increase will be necessary.  10. Arms and Ammunition. Except in isolated cases all guerillas are now armed and equipped to a very high standard and where they are short this can be easily redressed by a redistribution by ELAS G.R.Q. The sole exceptions are EAST MACEDONIA A and PAJKO B No further arms or ammunition sorties need be sent until March when it will be advisable to send a large quantity of ammunition to bring them up to strength for NOAH'S ARK.  PLAN.  11. Phase II. This phase will start immediately and will consist of   a Re-grouping the Mission.  b Persuading guerilla leaders to reduce their followers to the minimum and to locate them in accordance with tactical requirements. 12. Regrouping Appendix A shows the target areas divided into 5 main areas marked 1 to 5 and 3 minor areas marked A.B.C. . In addition 2 reception/evacuation areas D and E for the receipt of stores for covert sabotage operations and evacuation of  personnel.  Each target area will be covered or flanked by a guerilla area in which will harbour a Mission H.Q. with one or more mobile stations according to the size of the area and number of targets to be reconnoitred and attacked.  Spare personnel will be formed into extra sabotage groups or be evacuated according to requirements and circumstances.  6, 13i Command Command will be organized as follows  r1 -s -Lt.Col. HAMMOND- 3  ELAS & EKKA t -C I i ' i-D FORGE 133 j-Lt.Col. BARNES- 4 Col. WOODHOUSE i ZERVAS Maj. TONES  Chief LOs in the I Col. STEVENS PELS-ELAS -5 Field -OUTLYING AREixS-j-A i '-B  -All Covert Sabotage Gps and E. Air Sorties  v Within the allotment of 21 which is Greece's quota for each of January and February sorties will be allotted as follows -  January 10 Clothing and Boots. 1 Arms and Ammunition 10 Food and other requirements of Military Mission. February 11 Clothing and Boots 2 Arms and Ammunition 8 Food and other requirements of Military Mission. March Not at the moment predictable but are likely to be considerably higher than for January or February 15 Timing The target date for completion of Plans for NOAH'S ARK will be 30th March 1944. mV ANNEX III Copy of a telegram d ted 18th January 1944 from His Majestyrs Ambassador to the Greek Government Cairo to Foreign Office No. 38 IMPORTANT SECRET My telegram No.-32. Reply of EAM Central Committee to Tsouderos was received here yesterday.. -7, Following is text   EAM feel particular satisfaction at your statements    denouncing pseudo-Evzone security battalions in as much as EAM alone attacked both here and abroad these units v/hich were in service of Germans and opposed our struggling nation. We regard it as necessary that you should continue your denunciation of the disgraceful co-operation with the Germans of Rallis and security battalions who have turned against tho Greek people their guerillas and their allies. As we have already told you in our proposals to all Greek parties and organisations we regard as even more necessary the unity of all Grcok forces for the liberation of Greece and the securing of a free political life after victory. In accordance with our previous statement we propose the formation of Government of national unity. Since you accept the principle of negotiation we regard it as essential ih order to avoid lengthy negotiations at a distance that you should send a responsible delegate to General Headquarters of Elas where he can meet our delegation empowered for the purpose .  2. My immediately following telegram text of Tsouderos' reply. OTP   ANNEX IV  Copy of a telegram dated 18th January 1944 from His Ma.jesty's Ambassador to the Greek Government Cairo  to Foreign Office  No. 39.  IMPORTANT  SECRET  My immediately preceding telegram.  Following is text of M. Tsouderos reply to E.A.M. Central Committee   Thank you for your telegram in reply to my broad cast speech about reconciliation between warring national guerilla bands. Your suggestion about formation of.a Government of national unity finds me as you know in full agreement as I have repeatedly expressed this over the radio and in interviews with the press. I think however that urgent and outstanding problem is the reconciliation and understanding between guerilla bands in order to strengthen our resistance to the enemy. I therefore suggest that you should proceed with the meeting for this purpose between your representatives and those of Zervas Colonel Woodhouse is empowered to act as my representative .as well as that of  -8, General /grp omitted/for purely military discussions at this meeting. Once this co-operation has been achieved I am anxious to discuss with representatives of various parties and organisations forftiation of a Government of national unity. I inform you that once this urgent understanding between guerillas has occurred you will be approached by our representative in Athens who will be authorised to come to an agreement about formation of Government.  2 Please see my immediately following telegram for comments.  OTP.  ANNEX V  Copy of a telegram dated 18th January. 1944 from His Majesty's Representative to the Greek Government Cairo . .to Poreign office  No 40  IMPORTANT  My immediately preceding telegram.  M. Tsouderos has made it clear to me that he will on no account send a representative to Elas General Headquarters or invite E.A.M. to Cairo. The question of an absolute national unity can only be discussed in Athens and under the presidency of Archbishop. The guerilla organisations in his opinion represent only a section of Greek public opinion and he would never be forgiven by his own people if he were to overlook this fact. /Grp. undec Should/ E.A.M. enlarge the issue by asking for a Government of national unity the representation must also be enlarged. 2. Greeks whom I have seen recently on their arrival here from Athens have all emphasised the growing prestige in Greece /grp omtd of/ Greek Government in Cairo. M. Tsouderos personally both because politics in Athens and leaders of guerilla have been discredited and because of his close association vidth Allied / grp. orntd J7 has gained considerably in influence. He is fully aware of this and has been strongly urged by recent arrivals from Athens to take a definite lead and tell the population what is required. The situation in this respect is very different from what it was some' months ago. 3. In the light of this E.A.M's reply may be turned to good account as it gives M. Tsouderos every opportunity he wanted The Greek Government s emissary has already arrived in Athens although no news has yet been /grp. undec received/ here of his discussions with the Archbishop If the latter accepts the task entrusted to him he will immediately be authorised by M. Tsouderos to act for the Greek Government in negotiations suggested by E.A.M. /OTP/   9, ANNEX VI  Copy of a telegram dated 16th January 1944 from His Majes'tyrs Ambassador to the Greek Government Cairo to Foreign Office  No. 41  IMPORTANT  My immediately preceding telegram.  SECRET  The need for real effort to achieve political unity is becoming all the more urgent in order to counter German efforts to create division amongst the Greeks. Formation of security battalions by Rallis at German instigation is' a case in point. In patras area where E.L.A.S. have antagonised civil population the action of security battalions against E.L.A.S. has been welcomed. Security battalions have attempted to contact a B.L.O. in this area in order to convince us that their conduct is patriotic. However true this may be it is out of the question for us to have any dealings whatever with those who are at any rate ostensibly co-operating with the Germans. B.L.O. has accordingly been instructed in this sense  2. In general the position of B.L.O s in Peloponnes is delicate. Their task according to instructions we he.ve sent them is not to break with E.L.A.S pending dis cussions for general reconciliation. While at the same time not losing confidence of civil population. If German intrigues are to be defeated in peloponnes E.A.M. as part of any agreement which may be reached will have to put their house in order in this area. OTP., SECRET WAR DEPARTMENT SECURITY CONTROL OPERATIONAL PRIORITY  From AFHQ in North Africa To WAR Nr. W-1944/4774 NAF 609 Cairo Unnumbered 05 February 1944  This is my NAF number 609 with reference to OZ 506 not to CCS. Signed Wilson. Cite FHGCT Addsd AGUAR for Combined Chiefs of Staff for action rptd Mideast USAFIME USFOR for British Chiefs of Staff for informationi USAFII.E pass copy to Mideast.  After full discussion with General Paget here the following organizations have been agreed to and it is proposed to set them up forthwith  Para 1. A special operations section at AFHQ to control SOE and OSS activities generally in the theater. Pending the move of this headquarters to Caserta this will have a small advanced echelon working in close touch with HQ MAAF. This section will have as part of its permanent composition representatives of PWB. See paragraph 4 below  Para 2 The control of military operations in support of the Partisans in Yugoslavia will pass to AFHQ who will exercise them through advanced force .133 in Italy This will be a temporary arrangement until control can be passed ov .r conveniently to ACME  Para. 3 SOE/OSS operations in the Balkans will continue at any rate for the present to be oporattd by force 133 under Middle East subject to the higher policy and general direction from AFHQ This decentralization is necessary  First Owing to the necessity of dealing with the Balkans as a whole and  Secondly Owing to the complicated wireless setup centered on Cairo which cannot be moved without hampering efficiency at a critical period  Para 4. To advise me on PWB matters a small advisory staff consisting of Vellacott with one British and one American advisor is to be set up.  No Sig.  IM-IN-3562 5 Feb 44 19152, This message must be thoroughly paraphrased if its text is to be published or communicated outside British or American services or departments. If re-transmitted unparaphrased other than through holders of Chiefs of Staff cypher settings  j  the originator must mark the message to be sent on One Time Pad .  COPY NO.  Fronn Chiefs of Staff  Tos A.F.H.Q.  Repeated s J.S. M V'ashington MOST SECh .1' Dated s 7th February 1944 IMMEDIATE  From Chiefs of Staff COSPIED 22.  Personal for General .ilson.  1. Pe find Arrangements proposed in your NAF 609 difficult to reconcile with Resident Minister's No. 192 2. Para 3 of NAF 609 seems to conflict with para 3. of Mr. MacMillan's No. 192 unless the former refers to short term and latter to long term arrangements. 3. P and long term A ' in Balkans and  B for i'.aclean Mission. T.0.0. 071805Z IMS  Distribution Restricted  U.S. Secretariat 2, 2  This message must be thoroughly paraphrased if its text is to be published or communicated outside British or American services or departments. If re-transmitted unparaphrased other than through holders of Chiefs of Staff cypher settings the originator must mark the message to be sent on One Time  COPY NO  To Chiefs of Staff  Info Joint. Staff Mission for TJ S Joint Chiefs of Staff  From General Wilson  MOST SECRET  I MEDIATE  MEDCOS S8  Reference OZ 692 of 7th February  Para. 1. I do not see anjr confusion between para 3 of NAF 609 which dealt with operational and policy control at A.F.H.Q and para. 3 of Ministers 192 which referred to organisation of Anglo-American Mission in Yugoslavia.  Para 2 Control of S.O.E./O.S.S operations in the Balkans is now exercised as follows   a GHQ operational activity in the Balkans.  b Responsibility for Yugoslavia Albania is delegated by Force 1.33 to &dv. Force 133.  c Control of military operations in support of Tito is exercised by A.F.H.Q. directly through Adv. Force 1335 which thus serves two masters.  d For secret intelligence activities O.S.S reports through USAFIME to Washington. Para 3. I intend the direct control of Adv. Force 133 shall pass to HQ ACMF when the necessary wireless set-up is ready in Italy and General Alexander is prepared to accept it. I shall continue to control operations in other Balkan countries through GHQ MEF.  Papa. 4. I propose that the Maclean Mission should be a joint Anglo-American Mission which should report to me I will endeavour to sort out the political and military questions involved and then pass on my recommendations to Combined Chiefs of Staff. General Devers agrees with this proposal.  T.0.0. 142112A Distribution  Restricted  U.S. Secretariat, jJL iuAw -Jo  IVfOST SECRET COPY F TELEGRAM I'lO. 918 OF FEBRUARY 18th FROM SOE HQ LONDON  FOR FRAiMCK FROM MOCKLER FERRYMAN  1. We have been discussing with Colonel Joe Haskell m  question of S.Ff staff for accompanying any force from Algiers into France. Colonel Anstey reported O.S.S. had approached him vath the idea of American being head of joint mission. We have replied that we agree integrated staff best. Question of British or American head should be decided by A.F. Headquarters. We would provide British portion here and considered whole staff should be trained here and sent out. We have a signal section in training earmarked for purpose if required.  2. Position is that while we can take decisions regarding SOE Algiers O.S.S. London cannot do so for O.S.S. Algiers. A.F. Headquarters or Washington must therefore decide. 3. Our own private view is that as time is short it would be best to have British head unless there is American available staff trained and fully in the picture of French resistance.,  a As you state in your paragraph C. the large number and papers on this subject has made it difficult for us to keep you fully in the picture and up to date position today is as follows a General WILSON in his MEDCOS 38 of February 14th has set out the command arrangements in the Mediterranean which he proposes.  b COS in their COS 44 167 0 of February 15th asked .Foreign Office and us to produce joint paper setting out our. views.   c The P.M. saw MEDCOS 38 and drafted a telegram to WILSON which he sent to COS for their views. In this he stated firstly that he did not wish to have joint Anglo-American mission to TITO secondly that he did not like the idea of placing YUGO SLAVIA and ALBANIAN operations under control of Alexander and wishes WILSON to control them direct himself.  d After considering both MEDCOS 38 and P.M. s draft telegram we have now produced a joint paper with Foreign Office together with a draft telegram for COS to send to WflLSON and these are being considered by COS February 19th with C.D. present.  e Gist of our draft telegram is as follows  1 We assume that control of all operations now carried out in Yugo Slavia and Albania will be assumed as soon as possible by A.F.H.Q. operating through SOE/OSS. This supersedes arrangements proposed in MEDCOS 38 paragraphs 2 and 3. I, Q  sVs   2   2 Clear that transfer will reduce importance of SOE/OSS operations controlled from Cairo. It is therefore assumed General WILSON will require senior SOE officer in the Mediterranean with his HQ s to he centrally placed. In view of the im portance attached to SOE/OSS operations in other parts of the Mediterranean suggested such a move is essential.  3 Reference paragraph 4 MEDCOS 38 and P.M s ruling that there will not be joint Anglo-American mission to TITO presume General WILSON will make it clear that on military questions MACLEAN remains sole official link with TITO on political matters each mission reporting to its own Government through existing channels.  4 Transfer of Yugo Slavia from Cairo to WILSON raises problem of provision to WILSON of Yugo Slav political guidance. Consequently ambassador or representative must become permanent member of Special Operations Committee which we understand is to be established at A.F.H.Q  f Joint SOE/Foreign Office paper referred to above has now been issued at COS 44 169 0 of February 17th.  G You will appreciate that we have always envisaged STAWELL as commander of all SOE Mediterranean activities. Thus in addition to Balkans we look to him to control operations to Southern France Northern Italy etc. LONDON TELEGRAM NO. 921 OF FEBRUARY 19 1944- PLANS. My immediately preceding telegram.   G For this we consider it essential that he be centrally placed and believe best place would be CASERTA where M.A.A.F.S. situated. He, MOST SECRET   r 3  would have his HQs there with a rear link at A.F.tf.Q. This would insist of DODDS PARKER and a small staff p'rom CASERTA he would be in the best position to ensure fullest use made of our resources and wou .d be able to control activities between his four sub commands  i.e. ALGIERS ITALY operations run by Brigadier MILES to Southern Albania and Cairo.  H Reference your 294 paragraph 1. You will see that there is not to be integration with OSS. Your paragraph 2. No. This is staff section at A.F.H.Q. dealing with special operations of each sub command as in g above which is under operational cont al commander who receives orders from Special Operations section responsible for technical control and  X  allocation of resources on arrangements for army M.G.R.A. Your paragraph 3. Force 133 is cover name for SOE Cairo advance  force 133 is cover name for Brigadier MILES and his base. Your paragraph 4 Answer above. Your paragraph 5. Not yet decided but expect General GAMMELL  wall be in the chair gr mut General CAFFEY a member together with representative of MACMILLAN H.M. Ambassador Yugo Slavia and organi zations concerned with P.W.E. and C. our representative being AM.   I We will telegraph again immediately result of C.O.S. meeting is known but trust for the meantime that above puts you in the picture.  j The foregoing answers your 295 paragraphs 1 and 5, TOP SECRET  1 T-0  TOP SECRET COPY NO. 79  C.C.S. 449/1 5 April 1944 COMBINED CHIEFS OF STAFF  ACTIVITIES OF O.S.S. IN EUROPEAN THEATER  Memorandum by the Representatives of the British Chiefs of Staff  1. The British Chiefs of Staff ha.ve considered the views of the U.S. Chiefs of Staff as set out in C.C.S. 449. The present position in the European Theater is that that part of Special Operations Executive S.O.E. which conforms in its area of operation to the sphere of the Supreme Commander Allied Expedi tionary Force has together with the Special Operations S.O. Branch of the Office of Strategic Services O.S.S. been placed under the Supreme Commander s operational control and the closest coordination exists between these two services. 2. The Special Intelligence S.I. and Morale Operations Branches of the Office of Strategic Services are under the control of Supreme Commander Allied Expeditionary Force in his capacity as Commanding General U.S. Forces in the European Theater and their relationship with Special Intelligence Service S.I.S. and Political Warfare Executive P.W.E. respectively while effecting a satisfactory coordination between them preserves the continuation of independent operations as outlined by the U.S. Chiefs of Staff. 3. The British Chiefs of Staff have hower and he finds these arrangements satisfactory. They presume therefore that the U.S. Chiefs of Staff will not wish to alter the present organization., C.C.S. 153rd.Mtg. 7.4-44. 3  5. ACTIVITIES OF Q.S.S. IN EUROPEAN THEATER  C.C.S. 449 and 449/1 THE COMBINED CHIEFS OF ST F -   Took note of C.C.S. 449 and 449/1.  Reports of discussion and conclusions reached on Items 6 to 8 inclusive are contained in Supplementary Minutes issued with limited distribution.  -3, / M.M. S . 4 14th.Mtg -6.4.44-   Yf   v Activities of O.S.S. in European Theater.  \\ C.C.8. 449 and 449/1 THE COMMITTEE were informed of the previous negotiations orS the activities of O.S.S. in the European theatre. It was hoped that the U.S Chiefs of Staff would accept the fact that no alteration in the present organisation under General Eisenhovrer's command was called for.  THE COMMITTEE -   Took note of the above statement, 5b  This message must he thoroughly paraphrased if jts text is to be published or communicated outside British or American services or departments. If re-transmitted unparaphrased other than through holders of Chiefs of Staff cypher settings the originator must mark the message 'to be sent on One Time Pad'.  COPY NO  To Chiefs of Staff  Froms Joint Staff Mission SECRET Dated 7th April 1944. J.S M 1623  Activities of O.S.S. in European Theater.  Re put across the first four paragraphs of COS W 1246 in 0 C .S . 449/1 at today's Meeting The C.C.S. approved this paper thereby agreeing that nothing should be done to alter the satisfactory arrangements now in being in the Allied Expeditionary Force for the coordination of O.S.S. and S.O.E. activities.  T.0.0. 072333Z Distribution  Restricted Colonel Pleydell-Bouverie  /, .essage must be thoroughly paraphrased if its text is to be published or communicated outside British or American services or depart- If retransmitted unparaphrased through other than holders of Chiefs of Staff cypher settings the originator must mark the age to be sent on One Time Pad. COPY NO. /P  From Wilson cite FHCOS.  To War Cabinet Offices for British Chiefs of Staff.  Info Joint Staff Mission for  U. S. Chiefs of Staff TOP SECRET SHAEF and SOMTO. IMPORTANT  MEDCOS 14 .  1'.' It is desirable to establish uniform general policy   covering action of SOE/OSS SO personnel in occupied European  countries when RANKIN B or C conditions arise. Recommendations  are given below. The C.C.S. might be asked to issue an ap  propriate directive in the light of any comments you and SHAEF  may wish to make.  2. In those occupied European countries in which RANKIN B or C conditions arise and to which Allied Military occupational forces are sent all SOE/OSS SO personnel should immediately contact the HQ of the occupational forces and should be prepared to carry out such of the follow ing roles as may be directed.  A To furnish means of communication with local resistance leaders and civil authorities.  B To assist in preventing civil war and excesses by the populace especially partisans.  C To furnish local information regarding topography road rail and telegraphic communications.  D To assist in preventing destruction and in arranging repairs of communications referred to in C preceding.  E To provide additional information regarding undesirable and dangerous elements.  F To assist in the dissemination of Allied propaganda and Allied military commanders instructions in regard to the restoration and maintenance of law and order resumption of normal work etcetera.  G To assist in the recovery of escaping Allied prisoners of war. 3. There it would be the responsibility of the local military commander to ensure that the activities of SOE/OSS SO personnel are properly coordinated with the functions of the civil affairs officers and security representatives attached to the occupational forces. 4. In those European countries to which occupational forces are not sent SOE/OSS SO personnel should pending the arrival of any Allied missions or civil agencies such as relief organisations take action on the lines of para. 2 B D F and G above. This should be coordinated by the senior SOE/OSS SO officer in the country under the direction of SHAEF or SACMED as appropriate. On the arrival of Allied missions or civil organisations SOE/OSS SO personnel should gain immediate contact with a view to giving assistance oh the lines of paras. 2 A C and E above., 5. In RANKIN C SOE/OSS SO personnel must be prepared as an important additional role to assist in conveying to enemy detachments in all countries the orders of the Theatre Commander relating to the carrying out of the armistice terms. 6. In all cases SOE/OSS SO personnel should be in structed to avoid becoming involved in local politics frontier disputes etc. 7. Detailed instructions to SOE/OSS SO personnel in each particular country will be drawn up by the Theatre Com mander as the situation demands and will take full acc-ount of the circumstances prevailing in each country. 8. In the circumstances contemplated there should be no change in the present channels of operational and administrative control of SOE/OSS SO personnel. T.0.0. 042030B Distribution  Restricted Lt. Col. Pleydell-Bouverie  U. S. Secretariat 2, n IQ  COPY NO.  To War Cabinet Offices. 0 From Joint Staff Mission. Dated 12th August 1944. CONFIDENTIAL  IMPORTANT  LETOD 265.  Are you going to come up on MEDCOS 143 .  T.0.0. 122255Z Secretariat.   action by S.O.E./O.S.S. in occupied Policy re  countries in event of RANKIN conditions   European arising., copy no.  To Joint Staff Mission. From War Cabinet Offices. Dated 13th August 1944.  SECRET DOTEL 234.  Reference LETOD 265 . Yes and when it has been considered in light of comments by S.O.E. and S.H.k.E.F. Latter not yet received.  T.0.0. 131050Z Distribution Secretariat.   Policy re action by S.0.E./0.S.S. in occupied European countries in event of RANKIN conditions arising., TELEGRAM  c  FROM LORDOR SOE TO NEW YORK NO 998 August 9th 1944-  Reference MEDCOS 143 on subject of role of 60E/0SS in liberated areas under Rankin B. or C. conditions SHAEF and ourselves have been asked for comments by British Chiefs of Staff. Matter may then be referred by latter to C.C.S. We are in general agreement with MEDCOS 143 and have no comments except on small matters of detail., THIS DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY OF HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY S GOVERNMENT The circulation of this paper has been strictly limited. Copy No... . G.O.S.. 44 714 Q 9TH AUGUST 1944  WAR CABINET CHIEFS OF STAFF COMMITTEE'  FUNCTION OF S. 0. E UNDER RANKIN 'B OR C CONDITIONS  mpcos 143  3 Note by S. 0. E.  1. General It is understood that the application of the proposals under discussion is limited in time to the interim period between RANKIN B or C conditions and the establishment of new regimes under Armistice or peace conditions. During this phase  S. O.E. are in full agreement with the principles outlined 2 Detail  The basic functions of S.O.E. under RANKIN B or O conditions are   a to assist the occupying authorities  b to frustrate hostile action detrimental to Allied interests. Within this general framework S.O.E. personnel should be prepared to undertake whatever is required of them by the appropriate authority. The examples given are mainly illustrations of the above and it may be that if the C C.S. think it necessary to issue a directivcs they would prefer to group their instructions under the above heads. The detailed applications given are all acceptable and might be added to as follows   a At end of para c add also to observe and give information on demolitions especially at ports and all booby traps or other impediments left by the enemy .  b In para d after communications insert etc and add at end also of public utilities of supply and petrol dumps and all transport .  c Add para h Similarly to prevent the escape of German or collaborationist officials .,  & Add para i To preserve records useful to the occupying forces e.g. Gestapo archives   e Add para ' o To assist in furnishing labour guides and interpreters as-required to fulfil the various tasks 'above .  Signed C. McV. GUBBINS  Offices of the War Cabinet  S.W. 1. 9TH AUGUST 19U4., THIS DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY OF HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY S GOVERNMENT X  C.O.S. 44 737 o  17TH AUGUST. 1944  V/.Ji CABINET  CHIEFS OF STAFF COMMITTEE  FUNCTION OF S.O.E./O.S. S. SO UNDER RAMCIN B OR .. Cj.  -CONDITIONS  Memorandm By Su-prerae Coraraander. Allied ExpeAiNonary  Reference General Uilson s cable'MEDCOS 143 regarding which the comments of Supreme Headquarters have been invited.  1. In general the draft policy is agreed subject to the modifibations shown below although it is pointed out that it has clearly been drawn up particularly for countries in the  MEDITERRANEAN Theatre where large numbers of United States ana  British Liaison Officers have been dropped or infiltrated into enemy occupied countries. In the sphere of Supreme Headquar  this situation only applies in FRANCE where uc . itv as present under the control of General Koenig m his capacity s Commanding General FRENCH Forces of the Interior. . also emohasised that the draft instructions do not specifically cover RANKIN' B conditions where continued resistance and sabotage action would be required in order to harass the retreat of the enemy forces Instructions issued under paragraph /  he a a lioy would have to bo framed to meet this eventuality  The following modifications to the draft are recommended  2.  to furnish local information regarding port Paragraph 2 c.  airfields road rail and teloccffiimunicatloii i.   to assist in preventing destruction of ou-d   Paragraph 2 d. in arranging repairs to naval adr and. communications facilities mentioned in sub-paragraph c. above and other specified  installations.  2 e to provide additional information to recognigaT   Paragraph -1 Pence authorities regarding undesirable and dangerous elements.   to assist in the dissemination anu   Paragraph 2 f. nafi.-rcoment of allied military commanders  instructions in regard to the restori . 5 ] nn and maintenance of law and order resumption of normal work standstill of displaced  reasons etc. Dissemination of allied  propaganda delated., I t kParaKratih 3 11 there it would he the responsibility of the local military commander to ensure that the activities of ' SOE/OSS SO personnel are properly co-ordinated with the uolicy of the occupational forces/1 Paragraph 5. in 'RANKIN C\ SOE/OSS SO personnel must be prepared as an important additional role to assist in conveying to the enemy detachments in all countries the orders of the Theatre Commander relating to compliance with the instrument of surrender 11  3. The above amendments are designed to broaden the scope of certain paragraphs of the Allied Force Headquarters draft. It is believed that there will be no objection to them. For tho Supreme Commander   Signed TAB. SMITH  Lieutenant General U.S. Army Chief of Staff.  Offices of the /ar Cabinet  S.W.l. 17TH AUGUST 1944.  -2, \\V co.s. M  i. FUNGTI0H8 OF 505/033 UHDEK S/JTKIN 'B1 OR 'C1 CONDITIONS C.0.S. 44 714 0 C.O.S. 44 -737 0 THE COMMITTEE had before them a Memorandum by the Supreme Commander Allied Expeditionary Force and a Note by S.O.E. commenting on General Wilson's proposals5 for a uniform general policy covering the actions of SOE/OSS personnel in occupied European countries under RANKIN B' or 'O' conditions.  MAJOR-GENERAL KENNEDY said that the two papers under consideration showed agreement with General Wilson's proposals and differed only in points of detail. He had therefore prepared a draft directive which might be issued by the Combined Chiefs of Staff embodying the amendments proposed by SCAEF and 30E and reconciling them where necessary. He  Circulated copies of this draft directive.  MAJOR-GENERAL GUBBINS said that the Minister of Economic Warfare was seeking tja ydi cjiion/ ar regarding the future of S. Thi's wo however not conflict with the terms of a directive issued by the Combined Chiefs of Staff to cover the period in which RANKIN conditions applied. He agreed with the terms of the draft directive circulated by Major-General Kennedy. .  THE COMMITTEE   a Approved the terms of the draft directive circulated by Major-General Kennedy as amended in discussion.  b Instructed the Secretary subject to the concurrence of the Foreign ffice to a forward the draft directive to the Joint Staff Mission with a view to its being - y3 issued by the Combined Chiefs of Staff to SCAEF and SACMED., copy no-   To JOINT STAFF Mission From Chiefs of Staff TOP SECRET Dated 26 August 194-4 IMMEDIATE COS W 282 Following From Chiefs of Staff.  Reference MEDCOS 143.  We have considered General Wilson's propos-r.xs in light of views of SCAEF and SOE. We recommend that directive contained in oar immediately following telegram he issued hy Ocmbined Chief. of Staff to SCAEF and SACMED.  2c Foreign Office agree.  T.0.0. 261720Z DI STRI5UTION Restricted Colonel Pleydell-Bouverie  V t, it  COPY NO  To Joint Staff Mission  O.T.P From Chief o Staff  TOP SECRET Dated 26 August 1944  IMMEDIATE  COS W 28  V  Following from Chiefs of Staff reference COS W 282.  Following is text of proposed directivet BEGINS  It is desirable to establish uniform general policycovering action of S0E/0SS S0 personnel in occupied European countries when RANKIN 1B or 1C conditions arise Recommend ations are given below.  2 . In those occupied European countries in which RANKIN B and ' C conditions arise and to which Allied military occupational forces are sent all SOE/OSS SO personnel should immediately contact the HQ of the Occupational forces and should be prepared to carry out such of the following roles as may be directed.  p. To furnish means of communication with local resistance leaders and civil authorities.   b To assist in preventing civil war and excesses by the populace especially partisans.  c To furnish local information regarding ports airfields road rail and telecommunications also to observe and give information on demolitions especially at ports and all booby traps or other impediments left by the enemy.  d To assist in preventing destruction of and arranging repairs to naval air and communications facilities mentioned in sub-paragraph e above also of public utilities supply and petrol dumps and all transport  e To provide additional information to recognised countc intelligence authorities regarding undesirable and dangerous elements.  f To assist in the dissemination and enforcement of Allied military commanders instructions in regard to the restoration and maintenance of law and order resumption of normal work standstill of displaced persons etc.  g To assist in the recovery of escaping Allied prisoners of war.  h Similarly to prevent the escape of German or collaborationist officials.  i To preserve records useful to the occupying forces  e.g. Gestapo archives and material of technical j intelligence value.  j To assist in furnishing labour guides and interpreters as required to fulfil the various tasks above. /, 3. Then it would be the responsibility of the local military commander to ensure that the activities of S0E/0SS S0 personnel are properly co-ordinated with the policy of the occupational forces and in particular with the functions of the civil affairs officers and security representatives. 4. In thos European countries to which occupational forces are not sent S0E/0SS S0 personnel should pending the arrival of an Allied Mission or Civil Agencies such as relief organizations take action on the lines of paragraph 2 b d f and g above Tnis fehould be co-ordinated by the senior S0E/0SS S0 officer in the country under the direction of ShAEF or SACMED as appropriate. On the arrival of Allied Missions or Civil organisations S0E/0SS S0 personnel should gain immediate contact with a view ro giving assistanae on the lines of Paragraph 2 a c and e above 5-In PANKIN 1C S0E/0SS S0 personnel must b. prepared as an inporcant additional role to assist in conveying in-enemy dote.cknents in all countr.es the orders of the Theatre Commander relating to compliance with the instrument of surrender  6. In all cases 80E/0SS S0 personnel should be instructed to avoid becoming involved in local politica frontier disputes etc 7. Detailed instructions to SOE/COSS SO perscnnex in each particular country will be drawn up by the Theatre Commander as the situation demands and will take full account of the circumstances prevailing in each country.  8. In the circumstances contemplated there should be no change in the present channels of operational and administrative control of SOE/OSS SO personnel. ENDS. DISTRIBUTION  Restricted  T.0.0. 261725Z Colonel Pleydell-Bouverie, , TOP SECRET COPY NO. 68  C.C.S. 449/2 28 August 1944 COMBINED CHIEFS OF STAFF  ACTIVITIES OF O.S.S. IN EUROPE  Memorandum by the Representatives of the British Chiefs of Staff  1. In MEDCOS 1 3 Enclosure A General Wilson put forward a proposal for the establishment of a uniform''general policy covering action of Special Operations Executive S.O.E. /Office of Strategic Services O.S.S. Special Operations S.O. person nel in occupied European countries when RANKIN B or C condi tions arise/ 2 The British Chiefs of Staff referred these proposals to the British S.O.E. and to the Supreme Commander Allied Expedi tionary Force SCAEF and in the light of their views which have now been received propose that the attached Directive Enclosure  B1' should be issued by the Combined Chiefs of Staff to SCAEF and to the Supreme Allied Commander Mediterranean SACMED .  CCS 449/2 i, TOP SECRET  EMCIDSURE A  MEDCOS 143 DATED 4TH AUGUST FROM SUPREME ALLIED COMMANDER MEDITERRANEAN TO COMBINED CHIEFS OF STAFF SUPREME COMMANDER ALLIED EXPEDITIONARY FORCE AND SPECIAL OPERATIONS MEDITERRANEAN THEATER OF OPERATIONS  1. It is desirable to establish uniform general policy cover ing action of SOE/OSS SO personnel in occupied European coun tries when RANKIN B or C conditions arise. Recommendations are given below.. The Combined Chiefs of Staff might be asked to issue an appropriate directive in the light of any comments you and SHAEF may wish to make. 2. In those occupied European countries in which RANKIN B or  C conditions arise and to which Allied Military occupational forces are sent all SOE/OSS SO personnel should immediately contact the headquarters of the occupational forces and should be prepared to carry out such of the following roles as may be directed.  A To furnish means of communication with local resistance leaders and civil authorities.  B To assist in preventing civil war and excesses by the populace especially partisans.  C To furnish local information regarding topography road rail and telegraphic communications.  D To assist in preventing destruction and in arranging repairs of communications referred to in C preceding.  E To provide additional information regarding undesirable and dangerous elements.  F To assist in the dissemination of Allied propaganda and Allied military commanders'instructions in regard to the res toration and maintenance of law and order resumption of normal work etcetera.   G To assist in the recovery of escaping Allied prisoners of war. CCS 449/2  2 Enclosure A, TOP SECRET  3. There it -would be the responsibility of the local military commander to ensure that the activities of SOE/OSS SO personnel are properly coordinated with the functions of the civil affairs officers and security representatives attached to the occupational forces. 4. In those European countries to which occupational forces are not sent SOE/OSS SO personnel should pending the arrival of any Allied missions or civil agencies such as relief organisa tions take action on the lines of paragraphs 2 B D F and G above. This should be coordinated by the senior SOE/OSS SO officer in the country under the direction of SHAEF or SACMED as appropriate. On the arrival of Allied missions or civil or ganisations SOE/OSS SO personnel should gain immediate contact with a view to giving assistance on the lines of paragraphs 2 A C and E above.   5. In RANKIN c SOE/OSS SO personnel must be prepared as an important additional role to assist in conveying to enemy de tachments in all countries the orders of the theatre commander relating to the carrying out of the armistice terms. 6. In all cases SOE/OSS SO personnel should be instructed to avoid becoming involved in local politics frontier disputes etc. 7. Detailed instructions to SOE/OSS SO personnel in each particular country will be drawn up by the theatre commander as the situation demands and will take full account of the circum stances prevailing in each country. 8. In the circumstances contemplated there should be no change in the present channels of operational and administrative control of SOE/OSS SO personnel. CCS 449/2 3 Enclosure A, TOP SECRET  ENCLOSURE B  DRAFT  DIRECTIVE FROM COMBINED CHIEFS OF STAFF TO SCAEF AND SACMED  1. It is desirable to establish uniform general policy cover ing action of SOE/OSS SO personnel in occupied European coun tries when RANKIN B or C conditions arise. Recommendations are given below. 2. In those occupied European countries in which RANKIN 'B and C conditions arise and to which Allied military occupa tional forces are sent all SOE/OSS SO personnel should immedi ately contact the headquarters of the Occupational forces and should be prepared to carry out such of the following roles as may be directed.  a To furnish means of communication with local resistance leaders and civil authorities.  b To assist in preventing civil war and excesses by the populace especially partisans.  c To furnish local information regarding ports airfields road rail and telecommunications also to observe and give information on demolitions especially at ports and all booby traps or other impediments left by the enemy.  d To assist in preventing destruction of and arranging repairs to naval air and communications facilities mentioned in sub-paragraph c above also of public utilities supply and petrol dumps and all transports.  e To provide additional information to recognised counter intelligence authorities regarding undesirable and dangerous -elements.  CCS 449/2 -4 -Enclosure B, TOP SECRET   f To assist in the dissemination and enforcement of Allied military commanders' instructions in regard to the restoration and maintenance of law and order resumption of normal work standstill of displaced persons etc.  g To assist in the recovery of escaping Allied prisoners of war.  h Similarly to prevent the escape of German or collabor ationist officials.  i To preserve records useful to the occupying forces  e.g. Gestapo archives and material of technical intelligence value.  j To assist in furnishing labour guides and interpreters as required to fulfil the various tasks above. 3. Then it would be the responsibility of the local military commander to ensure that the activities of SOE/OSS SO personnel are properly co-ordinated with the policy of the occupational forces and in particular with the functions of the civil affairs officers and security representatives. 4. In those European countries to which occupational forces are not sent SOE/OSS SO personnel should pending the arrival of an Allied Mission or Civil Agencies such as relief organiza tions take action on the lines of paragraph 2 b d f and  g above. This should be co-ordinated by the senior SOE/OSS SO officer in the country under the direction of SHAEF or SACMED as appropriate. On the arrival of Allied missions or Civil organ isations SOE/OSS SO personnel should gain immediate contact with a view to giving assistance on the lines of paragraphs2 a  c and e above. 5. In RANKIN C SOE/OSS SO personnel must be prepared as an important additional role to assist in conveying to the enemy detachments in all countries the orders of the theatre commander relating to compliance with the instrument of surrender. CCS 449/2 -5 -Enclosure B, TOP SECRET  6. In all cases SOE/OSS SO personnel should be Instructed to avoid becoming involved in local politics frontier disputes etc. 7. Detailed instructions to SOE/OSS SO personnel in each particular country vill be drawn up by the theatre commander as the situation demands and will take full account of the circum stances prevailing in each country. 8. In the circumstances contemplated there should be no change in the present channels of operational and administrative control of SOE/OSS SO personnel. CCS 449/2 6 Enclosure B, top SECRET  68   TOP SECRET COPY NO.  C.C.5. 449/3 9 September 19 COMBINED CHIEFS OF STAFF  ACTIVITIES OF O.S S. IN EUROPE Reference a. C.C.S. 449/2  Memorandum by the United States Chiefs of Staff  1. The United States Chiefs of Staff agree to issuance of the draft directive contained in Enclosure B to C.C.S. 449/2 subject to the following changes a. The substitution of All SOE personnel and Special Operations personnel of OSS for the term SOE/OSS SO personnel wherever it appears in Enclosure B of C.C.S. 449/2. b. Rephrasing of paragraph 1 Enclosure B page 4 as follows-  it-iB-desirable-te-eetablish The following uniferH general policy will apply to the eevering action of S6E/ SS- S9- -perseHHel all SOE personnel and Special Operotions personnel of OSS in occupied European countries when RANKIN B or C conditions arise. ReesrajaeRdatiens are-given-teelew-r  CCS 449/3, t'\1รยฐ  11th September 1944 LT. COL. G.G. EPLEY ACTim lS .9.g..lfi .St.St JN EUROPE C.C.S. 449/3 The modifications to the draft directive  Enclosure B to C.C.S. 449/2 contained in C.C.S. 449/3 are acceptable to the British Chiefs of Staff. T. E. H. BIRLEY Group Captain. i, \ \ WAS DEPARTMENT CLASSIFIED MESSAGE CENTRE   i w -4 OUTGOING MESSAGE  TOP SECRET  Combined Chiefs of Staff Col G.G. Epley W.D. Ext 77500  12 September 1944  Supremem Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Forces Forward Echelon France  Commanding General Allied Force Headquarters Caserta Italy  Commanding General United Kingdom Base Section London England  OCTAGON  Numberi 1ARX 29538 VICTOR 73  TOPSEC to Eisenhower France and Wilson for action to United Kingdom Base Section London pass to British Chiefs of Staff and Headquarters Communication Zone Main for information. This message is FACS 77 to Eisenhower and FAN 414 to Wilson from the Combined Chiefs of Staff.  1. The following general policy will apply to the action of all SOE personnel and Special Operations personnel of OSS in occupied European countries when RANKIN B or C conditions arise. 2. In those occupied European countries in which RANKIN Bn and C conditions arise and to which Allied military occupational forces are sent all SOE personnel and Special Operations personnel of OSS should immediately contact the headquarters of the occupational forces and should be prepared to carry out fcuch of the following roles as maybe directed.  a To furnish means cf communication with local resistance leaders and civil authorities.  b To assist in preventing civil war and excesses by the populace especially partisans.  c To furnish local information regarding ports airfields roads rail and telecommunications also to observe and give information on demolitions especially at ports and all booby traps or other impediments left by the enemy.  d To assist in preventing destruction of and arranging repairs to naval air and communications facilities mentioned in eub-paragraph Cc above also of public utilities supply and petrol dumps and all transports.  e To provide additional information to recognised counter-intelligence authorities regarding undesirable and dangerous elements.  f To assist in, 2  Allied military commanders' instructions in regard to the resotration and maintenance of law and order resumption of normal work standstill of displaced persons etc.  Cg To assist in the recovery of escaping Allied prisoners of war.   h Similarly to prevent the escape of German or collaborationist officials.  i To preserve records useful to the occupying forces  e.g. Gestapo Archives and material of technical intelligence value.  j To assist in furnishing labour guides and inter preters as required to fulfil the various tasks above. 3. Then it would be the responsibility of the local military commander to ensure that the activities of all SOE personnel and Special Operations personnel of OSS are properly coordinated with the policy of the occupational forces and in particular with the functions of the Civil Affairs officers and security representatives. 4. In those European countries to which occupational forces are not sent all SOE personnel and Special Operations personnel of OSS should pending the arrival of an Allied mission or civil agencies such as relief organisations take action on the lines of paragraph 2 b d f and g above. This should be coordinated by the senior SOE/OSS SO officer in the country under the direction of SHAEF or SACMED as appropriate. On the arrival of Allied missions or civil organisations all SOE personnel and Special Operations personnel of OSS should gain immediate contact with a view to giving assistance on the lines of paragraph 2 a c and e above. 5 In RANKIN C all SOE personnel and Special Operations personnel of OSS must be prepared as an important additional role to assist in conveying to the enemy detachments in all countries the orders of the theatre commander relating to compliance with the instrument of surrender.  6. In all cases all SOE personnel and Special Operations personnel of OSS should be instructed to avoid becoming involved in local politics frontier disputes etc. 7. Detailed instructions to all SOE personnel and Special Operations personnel of OSS in each particular country will be drawn up by the theatre commander as the situation demands and will take full account of the circumstances prevailing in each country. 8. In the circumstances contemplated there should be no change in the present channels of operational and administrat ive control of all SOE personnel and Special Operations per sonnel of OSS. End.  CM-OUT-29538 13 Sep 44 0230Z, Cel-/6  . FUNCTIONS OF S .0 .E ./0.3 . S . UNDER HANT-IN B11 OR ''C11 CONDITIONS ' A   Previous .Reference Q.C.B UU1 2oUth Dtp . 0 . Mjn. I THE COMMITTEE tool note of a telegram from the Combined Chiefs of Staff containing a directive which had been sent to General 'Eisenhower and General Wilson covering the action of S.0.3./0.S.S. personnel in occupied European countries when Panlcin UB' or 'C'1 conditions appeared.. -Off e FACS 77/FAN 4l4, TOP SECRET  f  TOP SECRET COPY WO. 68  C.C.S. 449A 19 September COMBIWED CHIEFS OF STAFF  ACTIVITIES OF O.S.S. IW EUROPE References a. C.C.S. 449/2  b. C.C.S. 449/3 Wote by the Secretaries  The Combined Chiefs of Staff have approved the recommenda tions in C.C.S. 449/2 as amended by C.C.S. 449/3. The message was dispatched to Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force and to the Supreme Allied Commander Mediterranean as FACS 77 and FAW 4l4 respectively.  A. J. McFARLAWD A. T. CORWWALL-JOWES Combined Secretariat. CCS 449/4, ' /274 TG. O  7. EVALUATION OF S.O.E'. OrERATIONS S 'Vj  Previous Reference C.0.S 45 ISSrcl MeejtiMJjimte 3 lem  THE COMMITTEE took note of a telegram from General Eisenhower reporting that he would he glad to discuss results of operations with S.O.E. representatives and suggesting that the latter should visit his Headquarters about 1st June detailed arrangements would he made direct with S.O.E.   j/ F ro 21569, FUTURE 8.0 ACTIVITY IN BRITISH ZONE OF EUSTRL M 11 1945 THE COMMITTEE considered a telegram from iFHO requesting approval to the cessation of S. O.E. activities in Austria.  In discussion general approval was given to the proposal hut it was suggested that the Foreign Office should he asked for their approval before a reply was sent to allied Force Headquarters.  THE COMMITTEE  Instructed the Secretary to seek the approval of  the Foreign Office to the proposal and subject  to this approval being accorded to despatch  a telegram to Allied Force Headquarters accordingly., THIS DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY OF HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY S GOVERNMENT -J The circulation of this paper has been strictly limited. It is issued for the personal use of TOP SECRET Copy No.. C.0.S. U5 461 0 -HTH JULY -1945 CHIEFS OF STAFF COMMITTEE FUTURE S.O.E. ACTIVITY IN BRITISH ZONE OF AUSTRIA  Previous Reference C.0 S. 45 174th Mtg Minute 9 . Copy of a letter dated 12th July 1945 from S.0.E to the Secretary Chiefs of Staff Committee kxs  I refer to A.F.H.Q telegram CS 97 of the 10th July 1945j. about S.O.E. activities in the British zone of Austria and to your conversation over the telephone with Craddock today. 2. We are somewhat at a loss to understand the statement in paragraph 3 that a continuation of activity by S.O.E. in Austria would result in duplication and confusion. We work as I think you know entirely under the operational control of EighthArmy and we look to them to allocate the tasks to be performed amongst the various secret organisations available in accordance with the particular contacts which such organisations have respectively built up. It follows from this that no duplication or confusion should arise in Austria any more than it does for example in Germany where in accordance with General Weekes arrangements the B.G.S. l co-ordinates the activities of the secret organisations and uses S.D.E. and the S.O.E. contacts to supplement his counter-intelligence resources. 3. As you know the Ad Hoc Committee on the future of S.O.E. is still sitting but its report should shortly be complete. It will I think recommend the continua tion of S.O.E. activity under suitable control. Our contacts in Austria have been built up with great care over the last two or three years and if our personnel are entirely withdrawn from Austria many of these contacts will be lost. To avoid the loss of these contacts we suggest that the S.O.Eo organisation in Austria should be reduced to the smallest possible proportions but be maintained in being to keep the contacts going until such time as the recommendations of the Ad Hoc Committee have been studied and it can be decided whether the Chiefs of Staff and the Foreign Secretary wish S.O.E. activity in Austria to continue or not. -1, it- In. the hope that this suggestion will receive approval I enclose a draft telegram which the Chiefs of Staff may care to send to A.F.H.Q.  5. I am sending a copy of this letter to Cavendish- Bentinck. ssH   Signed H.N. SPORBORG  Offices of the Cabinet and Minister of Defence S.W.1.  13TH JULY 1945   Annex  AKUEX  DRAFT TELEGRAM  1. We agree para-military task of S.O.E. organisation in Austria now completed and approve consequent cessation  S.O.E. activities. 2. Ad Hoc Committee composed of representatives Foreign Office Service Ministries and interested agencies how sitting here to determine long term role S.O.E. organisation. 3. Pending decision you should retain small number S.O.E. personnel Austria in order preserve continuity and contacts without prejudice to final decision. 4. In meantime in order to avoid any possible duplication and confusion you should retain full operational control over this nucleus., c.o.s./ /' MTG. 0  JOL 1 6 2945 14-FUTURE S.O.E. ACTIVITY IN BRITISH ZONE OF AUSTRIA C.O.S. 45 461 0 4f7  Frevious Reference C.O.S. 45 174th Meeting Minute 9  THE COMMITTEE considered a letter from S.O.E. suggesting a draft reply to a telegranr from AFH repairing authority to stop future S.O.E. activity in the British zone of Austria and a minute dated 15th July hy the Secretary containing the views of the Foreign Office and an alternative draft reply to the AFHy telegram.  SIR DOUGLAS EVILL said that he thought it would he premature to authorise the entire cessation of all S.O.E. activity in the zone before the views were made known of the Committee which had been established to examine the future of the S.O.E. organisation. All S.O.E. work in Austria was under the local commander's control and the S.O.E. had stated that there was a definite value in retaining their contacts. A similar problem on S.O.E. activities in Germany had been resolved in favour of retaining the S.O.E. organisation.  SIR ARCHIBALD NYE said that S.O.E. in Austria worked entirely under 8th Army Control and that if S.O.E. wished to preserve their contacts it should be left to the Commander on the spot to decide how best this could bo achieved. He accordingly suggested certain amendments to. the suggested draft reply by S.O.E. He noted that the Foreign Office had no objection to the cessation of  S.O.E. activities in Austria providing the British Commander who no doubt would consult his political advisor agreed. THE COMMITTEE   i Took note of the views of the Foreign Office  ii Instructod the Secret .ry to draft and despatch/ a reply to .kFHQ in the light of the discussion.  CS 97 / Sent as COS ED 232, c. o. s. tiZJlMre. 0 / JUI241S J 2. FUTURE S.O.E. ACTIVITY IN THE BRITISH ZONE /C F AUSTRIA  Previous Reference C.0.S. 45 177th Meeting. Minute 14  THE COMMITTEE onsid red a telegram from A.F.H.C. in reply to a telegram from the Chiefs of Staff suggesting that a certain number of S.O.E. officers and clerical staff might be retained in Austria under the control of 8th Army.  THE COMIvlITTEE   a Agreed to the retention of a small number of S.O.E. officers and clerical officers in Austria under 8th Array control  b Instructed the Secretary to reply7 to A.F.H.E. notifying their agreement and to inform S.O.E. of this decision. x   COSMED 232 / Sent as OZ 4570 GUARD. ', THIS DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY OF HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY S GOVERNMENT The circulation of this paper has been strictly limited. \ It is issued for the personal use of ../Q. . ..  TOP SECRET Copy No. O.O.S. 45 572 o  10TH SEPTEMBEH. 1945  CHIEFS OF STAFF COMMITTEE  S.O.E. ACTIVITY IN THE BRITISH ZONE OF AUSTRIA Copy of a letter HNS/2052 dated 8th September51945 from S.O.E. to the Secretary Chiefs of Staff Committee.  At the Meeting on 24th ..July the Chiefs of Staff Committee agreed to the retention of a small number of S.O.E. officers and clerical staff in Austria under 8th Army control and  A.F.H.Q. was notified of their agreement. Since this decision of the Chiefs of Staff Committee the directive given to the senior S.O.E. Officer working under 8th Army has not proved workable or compatible with the status of S.O.E as a Secret Organisation It has therefore been decided to withdraw the S.O.E. Detachment from Austria as soon as possible subject to the liquidation of outstanding agents and claims and instructions have been sent to the Detachment Commander in Austria to notify H.Q. 8th Army to this effect in view of the fact that agreement for the retention of an S.O.E. Mission in Austria was given by the Chiefs of Staff you may wish to be informed of the decision which has now been taken.  Signed H.N. SPORBORG  Offices of the Cabinet and Minister of Defence S.W 1  10TH SEPTEMBER 1945.  C.Q.S. 45 182nd Meeting Item 2. 4570 GUARD, c. o. s. 22UI-MTG. u SEP 12 1945  S.O.E. ACTIVITY IN THE BRITISH ZONE OF AUSTRIA C.0.S. '45' 572 0  Previous Eeforence C.Q.S.fES' lo2ncl Mtp . Min 2 THE COMMITTEE considered a letter dated 8th September from S.O.E. stating that it had been decided to withdraw the S.O.E. detachment from Austria as soon as possible and that instructions had been sent to the Detachment Commander in Austria to notify Headquarters 8th Army to this effect. SIR ANDREW CUHRINGHAM said that he would like to know more of the reasons for this withdrawal. S.O.E. had stated that the directive given to the senior S.O.E. officer working under the 8th Army had not proved workable or compatible with the status of S.O.E. as a secret organisation. He would like to know what the contents of this directive were and why it had proved incompatible. THE COMMITTEE Instructed the Secretary to ask S.O.E for further details concerning 'X' above.   xinnex III, ANNEX III  Copy of a letter C.O.S. 12 81/5 dated 12th September from the Secretary Chiefs of Staff Committee to S.O E.  The Chiefs of Staff this morning considered your letter HMS/2052 dated 8th September notifying them that it had been decided to withdraw the S.O.E. detachment from Austria as soon as possible subject to the liquidation of outstanding agents and claims and that instructions had been sent to the detachment commander in Austria to notify H. Eighth Army to this effect.  2. In your letter you state that the directive given to the senior S.O.E. officer working under Eighth Army has not proved workable or compatible with the status of S.O.E. as a secret organisation and the Chiefs of Staff ask if they may be supplied with further details as to the contents of this directive and why it had proved incompatible  C.O.S. 45 572 0 -7,  3-.O.S. 2.2 f tflG. o. 9. -/r.  12. S.0.5. ACTIVITY IH THE BRITISH ZONE OF AUSTRIA C.0. S. f45 577 0  Previous Reference. C.O.S. 45 221st Mt . Min. 9  THE COMMITTEE had before them a letter from S.O.E. giving in more detail the reasons for the S.O.E. decision to withdraw the S.O.E. detachment from Austria as soon as possible.  SIR ALAN BROOKE handed round copies of a suggested telegram to B.T.A. emphasising the importance of preserving continuity of contacts in Austria and stating that a general directive for all S.O.E. was being prepared which when approved should clarify the role and tasks of this particular detachment which should bo retained under B.T. . control.  THE COMMITTEE  Agreed with the terms of the draft telegrarri and instructed the Secretary to send/' it to S.O.E. for their comments before despatch.  Annex III, ANNEX III  COPY OF LETTER COS. 1319/5' DATED 20TH SEPTEMBER. 19 5. FROM TEE OHIEES OF STAFF SECRETARIAT TO  S.O.E. The Chiefs of Staff at their meeting this morning considered your letter HNS/2054 of the 17th September giving further details regarding the decision to withdraw the S.O.E. detachment from Austria  2. The Chiefs of Staff propose letter and its enclosures to send the attached telegram to B.T.A. which they think will meet the points which you make. They would however welcome your observations on this telegram prior to its despatch. DRAFT TELEGRAM  FROM COCO  TO BTA  Following from Chiefs of Staff  Reference 4570 dated 24 Jul 45.  1. Understood that SOE detachment withdrawn owing to disagreement over directive issued 2. Important to preserve-continuity of contacts in view of possible long term policy. 3. General directive for all SOE being prepared which when approved should clarify role and tasks. 4. You should therefore retain SOE detachment under your control with the object given in para 2. It is considered that any intelligence work undertaken by SOE should be incidental to their primary operational task, C. O. S. 2 0 MTG. 0 9. 10. 7. S.O.E. ACTIVITY IN THE BRITISH ZONE OF AUSTRIA  Previous Reference G.O.S. fUF 229th Ht . Min. 12 THE COMMITTEE took note with approval that in anticipation of instructions a copy of a telegram from General McCreery stating that he agreed with the retention of the present S.O.E. detachment as at present constituted but would be glad of early clarification'of the intended role and primary operational tasks of S.O.E. had been passed to S.O.E. who stated that no further action would be taken until the general S.O.E. Directive had been cleared by the Foreign Office.  Number 80 Guard, O.S.S. and S.O.E. in EUROPE. frile Ho. 11/20. Ho.  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  3  9 10 11 12  13  14  15 16 17 18  19 20 21 22  23  24' 25 26 27 23  29  Paper. Date. Memorandum for Brig.Redman. 26.8.43.  J.S.M. 1147. 31.3.43. C.O.S. W 793. 9.9.43. J.S.M. 1166. 9.9.43. Memo to General Deane. 9.9.43. C.O.S. 43 211th.Mtg. 0 -Item 6. 9.9.43. DOTED 1237. 10.9.43. C.O.S. W 810. 15.9.43. C.O.S. 43 2l6th.Mtg. 0 -Item 3. 15.9.43. J.S.M. 1200. 22.9.43. C.O.S. W 852. 3.10.43. C.O.S. 43 603 0 . 3.10.43. C.O.S. 43 237th.Mtg. 0 -Item 11. 5.10.43. Proposed Operations by O.S.S. in the European Theater. Memo to Captain Royal. 7.10.43. SOE/OSS Relations. 25.11.43. C.C.S. 449. 28.12.43. M.M. S 43 36. 29.12.43. NAF 575. 2.1.44 M.M. S 44 1. 3.1.44. 'Memo to Brigadier Redman. 5 1.4/ M.M. S 44 lst.Mtg. -Item 2. 6.1.44 J.S.M. 1396. 7.1.44 LETOD 1665. 8.1.44 F.O.Telegram No.210 In. 8.1.44 C.O.S. 44 54 0 . 21.1.44 NAF 609. 5.a.44 COSMED 22. 7.2.44 MEDCOS 38. 14.2.44., 0.S.S. and S.O.E. in EUROPE. File No.11/20. No.  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  llA  42. 43 44 45 46 47 48 48A  4.9  50  51 52  53  Paper. Tel.No.913 from London. Tel.No.919 from London.  C.C.S. 449/1. C.C.S. 153rd.Mtg. -Item 5. M.M. S 44 l4th.Mtg. -Item 2 V . J.S.M. 1623. MEDCOS 143. Lii fOD 465. uOi'LL 234. LOL From London No. 993. C.O.S. 44 714 o .  C.O.S. 44 737 0 . C.O.S. 44 284th.Mtg. O -Item 1. C.O.S. W 282. C.O.S. W 283. Tel.No.135 from SOE London.  C.C.S. 449/2. C.C.S. 449/3. Memo to Lt.Col.Epley. FACS 77 and FAN 4I4. C.O.S. 44 309th.Mtg. 0  C.C.S. 449/4COS 45 174th Mtg. 0  C.O.S. 45 461 0 C.O.S. 45 177th Mtg. 0  C.O.S. 45 182nd. Mtg.  C.O.S. 45 572 0  C.O.S. 45 22L st tg. -Item 5  -Item 9  Item 14 Item 2. Item 9.  Date.  18.2.44 21.2 44 5.4.44 7.4 44 6.4 44 7.4 44 4.8.44 12.8.44 13.8.44. 9.8.44 9.8.44 17.8.44  22.8.44. 26.8.44 26.8.44. 27.8.44. 28.3.44. 9.9.44. 11.9.44. 12.9.44. 16.9 44 19.9.44. 11.7.45  13.7.45  16.7.45  24.7.45. 10.9.45. 12.9.45. 20.9.45  29.10.45  C.O.S 45 229th Mtg -Item 12 C0S 45 26lst Metg. -Item 7., C \4-6/44J  Office Of SWTtGIC SekiiclS research A-t. AMALYSIC &WHCH CENTRAL EA SECn0f pyauc ORDER -POUCE A REPofcf R. 194Z  5ft93 Cow o. 43, OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES Research and Analysis Branch Central European Section  PUBLIC ORDER POLICE AND THE ELITE GUARD  Report No 90  November 13 19U2    43  Copy No  5293, CONFIDENTIA.L  IA.BLE OF CONTENTS  Page  25. Public Order Police and the Elite Guard SS. a. --PublicOrder... IT. --The Police..  l. --GeneralObservations.  2.1 --Strength Statistics of the German Police  3. - Organization of the Gorman Police. . .   a --The Reich Leader of the SS and Chief of the German Police ....  b --The Higher Leaders of the SS and Police  -The Ordor Police ......... I --Tho Chief of the Order Police .... HT. --The General Inspectors of tho Order Polico 3 . --Tho Main Office of the Order Polico . .  a. --The Command Office .......  b. --Colonial Police Office.  T. --Tho Office of Law and .administration . 4-The Inspectors of the Ordor Police. . .   F. --The Protection Police .......  a. --Commanders of the Protection Police  b-. --Barracked Protection Police .... o --Local Organization of tho Protection Polico d . --Tho Typical Organization of the Police in a  Larger Gorman City .  a. --Polico Registration of Gormans and Foreigners  Tho National Roster ....... 6. --Firo Protection Police .. 7. --Tho Gendarmerie. a. --Tho Alpino Gondarmorie .......  b. --Tho Motorized Gendarmerie. o . --Tho Commanders of the Gondarmorie . . .  T. --Tho Loaders of tho Gondarmorio Captainships o . --Tho Loader of tho County Gondarmorie . .  d -Tho SecurityPolico.. . l. The Chiof of tho Socurity Police and Socurity Service...  24  2. --Tho Main Office for the Security of the Reich 24 S . --Inspectors of tho Security Polico and Security Service.  4. --The State Criminal Polico. 7. --Tho State Police and Secret Stato Polico  a. --The Frontier Police .......  - o -Tho Security Service of the SS Reich Leader  f --The State Polico Administration Units .  i --Police Authorities ........ 1. --Tho Higher Police Authorities .... 2. --The County police authority. S . --Tho Local policeAuthority.  hj--Special Police. ....  1. --The Railway Polico.  2. --The Post Guards ..... 5-.--Tho Factory Guards 4 --Tho Stream and Navigation Polico . .  S . --Tho Marine CoastPolice. 6. --Tho Air Police. 7. --Tho Mountain Polico .. IT. --Tho Customs Officials.  AT--Police Auxiliaries ........  1. --Tho PoliceRoservo.. . 7. --Auxiliary Polico. ..  5893, COEFIDENTIiiL  Page  3. --Air Raid PrecautionPolice. 36  T. --The Technical Emergency Corps. 37 S . --Storm Trooper Detachments . 4 . . . . . 38 S . --The National Socialist Motor Corps .... 38  7. --The SS or Elite Guard ........ f4. --Personnel ...... ...... . 38  5 --Police Control ovor Outlying Groups and Areas . 39  6. --The Gorman Police in Occupied Areas. .... 40  c. --Tho SS or Elito Guard .......... 42  l. --General Observations ......... 42  2. --SS Ranlcs andUniforms.. 47  3. --Tho Reich Leader of the SS ...... . 51  4. --Tho Reich Command of the SS ...... . 52   a --The Main Office for the Personal Staff of the Reich Loader of theSS.. 53  1. --Tho Press Bureau of tho SS Reich Leader . . 53 2 . --The Culture Roforat. ........ 53 3. --Tho Department of Cultural Research .... 53  4. --The Study Society of The .ancestral Heritage . 53  7. --The Department of Economic Aid. . .... 53  6. --The  Fountainhead of Life Association ... 53  7. --The administration of the Houses provided for SS Members attending colleges and univer sities.. 54  8. --The Bureau for the Four Year Plan .... 54 9 . --The Chief of the Protocol ....... 54  10. --The Liaison Officers of the SS Reich Leader with the Reich Ministries and Party Bureaux. . 54  b --The Main Office for SS personnel ..... 54  1. --Office for tho Personnel Records of SS Leaders 54 S . --Office for Prospective S3 Leaders..... 54 S . --Office of Training and Education ..... 54  T. --The Inspector of SS Junker Schools .... 54  c7 --The Main Office of the SSCourt. 55  1. --Office for Disciplinary Matters ..... 55 2 . --Office for Law.. 55  3. --LiaisonOffice. 55  d7--The Main Office for SS administration and Economic Matters. .... 55  1. --Office of thoBudget. 56  2. --Office of Buildings ......... 56  7. --Office of Economic Undertakings ..... 56  oj--Administrative Chief of the Guard Echelons of tho National Socialist Party and Roich Troasuror of theSS... 56   f --The Main Office of thoSS....... . 56  T.. --Tho CentralChancery. 57  7. --Tho Leadership Office ........ 57  3. --The personnel Office ......... 57 4 . --Liaison Officer with the SS Court. .... 57  5. --Tho Administration Office ....... 57  6. --Office for Medical and Health Services ... 57  7. --The Induction Office ......... 58  8. --The Office for Security Tasks ...... 59  9. --Office for Recruiting Military SS. . . . . 59  10. --The Procurement Office ........ 59  11. --Office of Physical Training... 59  12. --Office of Communications. ....... 59  13. --Administrative Office for Veterans and Veterans Dependents ........ 59   5893, CONFIDENTIA.L  Pago  14. --Iho Office of Education and Indoctrination . 59 T5. -Inspector of Motor Transport. . . . 60  16. - -Inspoctor of the SS Cavalry ...... 60  17. --Inspector of the SS Riding Schools. . . . 60 IF. --Inspootorato of the SS-Vorfftgungstruppon. . 60  19. --The Loader of the SS Doathhoad Regiments and Concentration Camps ....... 60  20. --Inspootorato of the SS Frontier and Guard Units.. 60  21. - -Welfare Camp at Schleiss'heim near Munich 60 - -Trade School of the SS-VorfUgungstruppon at St. Georgon........  60  23. -The SS Training Camp at Dachau near Munich 60  24. -The SS Convalescent Home at Sasbachwalden. 60 2b. -The SS Motor Transport School at Berne in Oldenburg.. 60  26. -The Main Riding Academy of the SS at Munich 61 27. The SS Remount Institute at Hamburg. . . 61 Command Office of the Military SS . . . . 61 The Main Office for Race and Settlement . 62 -i. -AdministrationOffice.. . 63 2 . -The Office of Family and Blood Relationships 63  3. -The Office for Racial Matters..... 63 ftf  I I 4. --The Settlement Office ....... 63 -The Main Office for the Security of the Reich 64 -The Reich Surgeon of the SS. 64 -The Chief of the Order Police ..... 64   5.7 -The Higher Leaders of the SS and Police 64  6. -The General SS.......... . 65  a - -General............. 65  b --Strength Statistics of the General SS. . 66  1. --Total Strength. ......... 66 7. --The Active Strength of the General SS . 66  3. --Strength of the Trained Reserve of the General SS. 67  a -The active General SS 67  b . --The SS Reserve. 67  รยฐ -The SS Cadre Section. . 67 4. -- Untrained Reserve 68 5. -- The police and Constabulary 68 6. - The Si\. and Other Semimilitary Organizations 68  cT--Organization of the General SS. 68 --Reich High Command of the General SS . 68   1 '  2. --The S3 Main Sections ....... 68 0 '--SS Sections........... 71 4. --SS' Regiments .......... 72 J5. --SS Battalions .......... 72 6. --S3 Companies .......... 73  clT--Personnel of the General SS. . . . . . 73  7 - -Finances of the General SS ..... . 74  f - -Supply and Equipment ...... 74  i - -Mobilization System ...... 74  h --Strategic and Tactical Doctrines . x75 -Training Morale and Efficiency . 75 -SS Strongholds.... 77  P  7. --The Military S3 ....... . 77   a --General . ......... 77   -Strength Statistics of the Military SS 80  1. -- Active Military SS ..... . 80  2. -- Trained Reserve ....... 80  o  -Organization of tho Military SS . 80  1. -- Relation to the other Armed Forces . 80  5893, CONFIDENTIA.L  Page  2. --The Comraandors of tho MilitarySS. 81 ST. --Units of the Military SS. ..  81  a. --SS-Division Adolf Hitler motorized . . 81  b. --SS-Division Reich motorized ....  82  c. --SS-Division. -Com. Offs Generalleutnant Dommelhuber .....  82  d. --SS-Division.--Com. Off Goneralloutnant Schmidt ......  82  o. --SS Polico Division ........ 82  f. --SS Polico Division.--Com. Offs Goneralmajor dor Polizoi Wttnnonberg ...  83  g. --SS Doathhoad Division. .'..  83  h. --SS Division.--Com. Off Genoralmajor Klepper. 84  i. --SS Division Viking . ....... 84  j. --SS Division Nordmark ....... 84  k. --SS MountainDivision. 85  l. --SS Socurity Divisions. ....... 85  m. --SS Cavalry Brigade ......... 85  n. --Firo Protection Police Regiments .... 85   l --Fire Protection Polico Regiment Sachsen 85  o. --Other Units of tho Military SS. . . . . 86   d --Personnel Characteristics of the Military SS . 87  o' --Finance.. 90  --Supply and Equipment. ......... 91   g --Recruiting and Mobilization System ..... 91  TI --Strategic and Tactical Doctrines. ..... 91   T --Training Morale andEfficiency. 91  8. --The Socurity Service of the SS Roich Loader. . . 95  9. --ThoForeignSS . . . . 95  10. --Conclusions ............. 98  APPERDIX  Part 1 --The Higher PoliceAuthorities.. 101 Part 2 --State Police Administration Units .... 103 part 3 --The State CriminalPolice. 105 Part 4 --The State Police and Secret State Police . . 107 Part 5 --Fire Protection Polico.... 108 Part 6 --SS Foot Regiments.. 110 SS MountedRegiments.. 113  .  5893, CONFIDENTIAL  25. Public Order Police and the Elite Guard SSi -a. Public Order. ' The respect of the German people for law and order is pro verbial and consequently often exaggerated. This reputation is founded on traits exhibited by a large segment of the population. An overwhelming desire for order has at times prevented revolution caused the people to endure social and political injustice and even to accept foreign rule. However there has always existed a less docile more active element of the population quite capable of stubborn hard-bitten resistance to a regime not of its choice.  Laws courts and police exist primarily for the perpetuation of the National Socialist state. Where the interests of the National Socialist state conflict with justice justice yields. The limits of crime are determined.not.alone by the statutes but by the healthy racial feeling of the .judges. Ex post facto criminal laws may be enacted. The already long list of criminal offenses has also been lengthened to enforce certain National Socialist Concepts. Thus the notorious Nuremberg Laws 1935 ' forbid racial infamy i.e. marital and extramarital relations between Aryan and Jew. Develop ments in the spring and summer of 1942 clearly indicate increased political interference with the functioning of German courts.  Crimo in the first year..of the war seemed to be on the de crease a development normally to be expected. Yet the number of minor offenses tended to increase no doubt as a result of the voluminous new war legislation. On the other hand the homicide rate declined markedly. The greater role accorded to women in the war economy brought an increase in female criminality. Also the number of youthful criminals showed a slight increase. Yet on a whole Germany is tending to repeat the Experience of England and Wales during the last war when crimo declined. In most countries crime is committod largely by the age.groups from 18 to 25 especially the males of these ago groups. During a war most males of those age   5093, CONFIDENTIAL   2  groups aro absorbed into tho arraod forces' with a consequent drop in tho incidence of civilian criminality.  b. The Polico. - l Gonenal Obsei-vations. For generations tho Gormans have boon accustomed to rigid polico control. While in tho United States it is still possible to live ono s rif0 oblivious to tho presence of tho polico oven the most law-abiding German rarely passes a year without standing several hours at tho bar of the local polico precinct offico. Under tho National Socialist regime tho polico control of tho individual is still increasing.  At the same time tho police organization is assuming new importance'as an instrument of political and military power. The first phase of this development antodatos tho present regime and reaches back to the Revolution of 1918. As a precaution against revolutionary movements the militarized barracked polico formations were expanded and placed in areas whore they never before had been stationed. Hitler's march to tho Munich Foldherrnhalle during the revolt Novem ber 8/9 1923 was routed by such a militarized polico formation. With tho acquiescence of the Roichswehr control of the militarized provincial police-was usually tantamount to do facto control of tho state. Tho Social Democrats sought this control by introducing into the police organization colls consisting of members of the Social Democratic party guard. At the decisive moment however this pre caution proved ineffective.  The-National Socialists took over the government of the Reich firmly resolved to avoid the pitfalls of their predecessors.  'Nevertheless consolidation of tho police was not achieved without a clash of personal ambitions. GBring as Minister President of Prussia gained control of tho militarized Prussian Protection Polico tho strongest police unit in tho Reich. Immediately he sot out to  -wold this -formation into a- weapon of personal power. In tho spring of 1933 he-'forbade members of tho Protection Polico to belong to the SA tho S3 or the Stahlholm on tho grounds that members of tho SA.   5393,  3  CONFIDENTIAL  83 and StahlhoLm'wer.o subject to their organizations' disciplinary  regulations. Ho followed up this moasuro by dismissing August 15  1933 the auxiliary police Hilfspolizci consisting of SA. members.  Obviously there was no room in the'Prussian Police for mon serving  any master but GBring  Not content with control of the Protection Police Schutzpolizci GBring founded in the spring of 1933 the notorious Gestapo or Secret State Police. Ho assumed direct command of what was then  a purely Prussian organization. Retaining the title Chief of the  Secret State Police GBring entrusted the active direction of the Gestapo to Diels an Oberregierungsrat formerly in charge of the Department for the Observation of Communism attached to the Prussian Ministry of Interior.  iJhile GBring consolidated his control of the police in Prussia SS Reich Leader Himmler starting from Bavaria gradually gained command of all.political police outside of Prussia. Certain developments in the first part of 1934 seem to have placed Himmler in a favorable position to bring the G8ring-controllod Gestapo under his sway. Chief among those developments is believed to have been the detection by Himmler's SS Security Service-of a plot against GBring's life. The plotters arcs said to have boon arrested in Berlin without the knowledge of GBring's own Secret State Police. TJhatevcr the immediate circumstances Diels was replaced by Himmler April 20 1934 who became Deputy Chief of the. Secret State Police GBring retaining his position as Chief. . After gaining this .foothold in Prussia Himmler managed in the space of two years to become Chief of the entire-German Police including both-GBring's Secret Police and Protection Police June 17 1336.  Himmler's rise to power in-the. German Police has been .parallel od by increasing interpenetration of. the SS .aiid thc Police both in the point of organization and personnel.- Sde'chart 1.   5 -93, Himmler Reich Leader SS Chief of the German Police Reich. Commissar for Strengthening of German Folkdom  Chief of the Order Police  Control. 1940-4].  Branches of tho German Police and othor Organizations under Himmler's   The The Chief of The  The Gendarmerie  The Alpine Gend armerie  The Local Protection Police of the Commu  nities  Special Police The Air Police Moun tain Police Railway Police  Stnsaii &  Naviga  tion Police Water  ways Protec  tion Police Marine Coast Police  Reich Security Po Sur lice and Se geon curity Ser   of the vice SS and the Po 'TEe 5e'curity Security lice Police Service of the S3 Reich i Leader  Dental Medical Corps Corps  j  Organ iza tion of the  Reich  Com   missar for the Strengthening of Ger man Folk dom, , -6 -CONFIDENTIAL  low subparagraph c-3 on the S3 . According to law Himmler is per sonally and diroctly subordinate to the Reich Minister of tho Interior  /  Actually ho is a semi-independent Reich official. He takos part in con  saltations of tho Reich Cabinot as far as those touch his competency.  His decisions have ministerial character. Ho controls a vast network  of organizations comprising tho Polico the-SS and the newly created  agency for the consolidation of German folkdom soo chart 1 The two  key-mon under Himmler aro the Chief of the Order Police and the Chief  of tho Security Polico and Security Service. After these two chiefs  the most important executives seem to bo some twenty-five or thirty   five Higher SS and Polico Loaders.  Directly responsible to Himmlor is the Inspector of the  Concentration Camps.   k Thรยฐ Higher Leadors of tho SS and Police - IiHhoro SS mid Polizoifilhrer. In contrast to the Chief of .the Order Police and the Chief of the Security Polico who are each in command of a single branch of tho Gorman Policp spo chart 1 tho Higher SS and Police Loaders are tho regional representatives of Himmler and may command both of the main branches of tho Police. Functionally tho Higher SS and Police  Loaders are the projection into a certain area of Himmler's executive authority as.. Loader of the SS and as Chief of tho Gorman Police some times also .in' his capacity as Commissar for the Strengthening of Gorman Folkdom  There'aro throe categories of Higher SS and Polico Loaders   1 the Highpr'SS and Polioo Loader for Special Purposes HBhoror SS und Polizeiftthror z.b.V. two of whoso staff majors can bo identified  2 the Higher S3 and Police-Leaders in tho Corps Areas Wohrkrcisc  3 tho Higher SS and Police Loaders in Gorman-occupied countries. Such executives aro known to be established in Occupied Franco tho Netherlands Norway Cracow Riga and Southern Russia. One or two more aro assumed to.be in Russia one probably-at Kiev othors pre sumably direct tho Gorman polico in Southeastern Europe, Chief of the liain Office of Budget and Buildings  Main Office of Bud get and Buildings  CONFIDENTIAL  Paragraph 25 Chart 2 Organization of German Police Summer 1940  F flhrer  Reich Minister of the Interior  Reich Leader of the SS and Chief of the German Police reichsfOhrer-ss undchefmceutschen polizei  The Chief of the Security Police and Chief of he 0 r d e r Police Security Service. CHEF EER SICHER-CHEF D E R R D N U N G P 0 L I Z E I HEITSPOLIZEI UND CES SD SICHERHEITS- MENSTES. Main Office for Security of the Reich Main Office of Order Police REICHSSICH2RHEITSHAUPTAMT KAUPT/JiT ORDNUNGSPCLIZEI Higher Leaders of the SS and Police One in each of the Corps Areas One in France the Netherlands Nor way Government General and Eastern German-occupied areas perhaps else  where  HIGHER POLICE Security Service SD 16 Main Sections AUTHORITIES 41 Sections also outposts. COUNTY POLICE AUTHORITIES LOCAL POLICE AUTHORITIES State Police and Gestapo 17 Main Branches 54 Branches Also outposts. Frontier Police Commiss'riats and Frontier Police Posts  County Police Authorities 1. Rural Counties Land Councillor  2. City Counties Lord  Mayor  Local Police Authorities The mayors of the cities and villages  Landgemein   den .  e Administration  August 1941 133 units Police Presidios POLIZEIPRXsIDIEN Police Directions P0LI3EIDIREKTICNEN Police Offices POLIZElXuTER Police Units managed by Land Councillors  These units perform many county and local police functions in their particular county.  Police Precincts in  larger cities also  Sections and Groups.  Most State Police  Administration Units  have barracked forma  tions of the Protection  Police SCHUTZPOLIZEI ., 8 CONFIDENTIAL  Tho following diagram illustrates tho powers of a Higher S3 and polico Loader in any one of the Corps Areas of the Reioh see also Chart 2. and c-6-0-2 of the subparagraph on tho SS . HIGHER SS AND POLICE LEADER  Chief of Staff Inspector In Assistants of the Main of the spector for special Section of the Security of tho tasks o.g. General SS in Service Order resettlement tho Corps Area & Security Police Police Staff Staff  i  Main Section Security Security of the Police Service General SS  The H igher SS and Polico Loader directs the preparations made for the defense of tho Roich by the Corps Area Order Police Security Polico and Security Service in collaboration with tho SS. TOion it becomes necessary to employ those agencies as a unit the Higher SS and Polico Leader takes command. Thus it seoms that these agencies would bo mobilized to suppress revolutionary movements or to repel suprise attacks by air land or water directed against the Corps Area. The command exercised over the agencies mentioned is temporary except in tho case of the General SS.  Tho Higher SS and Police Loader in German-occupied countries or areas exorcises continuous command. Ho has authority roughly oquiva.lont to that of Himmler within tho Reich. The appended diagram in most respects is believed typical of the powers of an Higher SS and Police Loader in occupied areas.   5893, CONFIDENTIAL  Tho Goman polioo fall into two largo categories tho General Police and tho Special Police of which tho fornor is far noro nunorous and important. Within the General Police arc two service branches  Dionstzweige the Order police and Security Police. The Order Police concerns itself principally with tho maintenance of public order. The Security Police on the other hand is engaged chiefly in the prosecution of ordinary crime and of political offences. The functions of both service branches at times overlap.  Tho two service branches are organized along-military linos and are centrally controlled iiembors of the Security Police generally wear tho service uniform of tho SS. Monbers of the sorvico branches within tho Order Police wear the regular police uniforms. For tho correlation of police ranks with tho ranks of tho SS the Gorman Army and tho U.S. Amy see-the subparagraph on tho SS c-2i   o Tho Order Polioo -Ordnungspolizei. In maintaining public order tho activities of the Order Police are extremely numerous. They police tho streets and aro present at larger gatherings of the populace. They regulate traffic. In this connection the Motorized Gendarmerie a branch of tho Order Police performs many useful tasks by enforcing traffic regulations and re covering stolon automobiles. Certain branches of tho 6rdcr Police on    5093, -10 -CONFIDENTIAL  force the fish and game laws. Others enforce regulations concerning water and forests. The Order-Police are also charged with taking care of the needy as well as the sick and wounded when no other agency is at hand. In addition the Order Polico play a vital part in the passive air-raid defense system Before the war the Order Polico started to absorb the most important fire-fighting units and now January 1942 have acquired direct control of the professional fire-fighting services in eighty-nine cities. After the first thousand-plane raid actually 906 on Cologne GBring transferred June 1 1942 the command of an important branch of the passive A.R.P. to the Order Polico viz. the Sichorhoits-und Eilfsdienst I. Ordnung which was renamed the Luftschutzpolizei or A.R.P. Police.  1 The Chief of the'Order Police -Chef dor Ordnungspolizoi -is the commanding officoh of all members of the Order Polico. Ho is directly subordinate to the Reich Leader of the SS and Chief of the Gorman Polico  Aside from Himmler the most prominent figure in the Gorman police force today is Kurt Daluogc Chief of the Order Police. Re cently April 20 1942 Daluego was promoted to the unprecedentod rank of Colonel 'General of the Police also SS-Oborstgruppenfiihror a rank never attained by the late Heydrich Chief of the Security Polico and Security Service. Dalougo now forty-five was born in Upper Silesia joined the Gorman Army in 1916 after graduating from a junior college  Roalgyrmaasium. Ho emerged from the war a deputy first sergeant  Vizofeldwobol. After the.war ho graduated as an engineer from the well-known Technical College at Charlottonburg. Prior to 1933 he won distinction as a. National Socialist stroot-fightor and participant in mooting-hall brawls. He was also loader of the SS in the Berlin dis trict. Elected a member 'of the Prussian Diet in 1932 ho specialized in police questions. In the autumn of 1933 Gdring made him General ioutnant Brigadier General U.S.A. of the Prussian provincial police  Landospolizoi. His relations with GSring arc believed to have re    5893, REICH UINISTRY OF THE INTERIOR  REICHSMINISTERIUM DES INNERN The Reich Leader of the S3 and Chief of the German Police ReichsfUhrer-SS und Chef der Deutschen Polizei Directly reeponsible to the Reich Leader and Chief the Inspector of the Concentration Camps  Chief of the Main Office of The Chief of the Security Police and Security Hie Chief of the Order Police Budget and Buildings Service Chef der Sicherheitspolizei Der Chef der Ordnungspolizei Chef des Hauptamtes und des SD Sicherheitsdienstes Haushalt und Bauten Main Office of Budget  of the Budget  Amt  Haushalt  Organization of German Police Paragraph 25 Chart 3  Main Office for the Security of the Reich  llain Office of the Order Police 1. General In  and Buildings Reichssicherheitshauptamt Hauptamt Ordnungspolizei spector of the  Hauptamt Haushalt Controls Security Police Controls Reich Office of Protection Po und Bauten training schools Emergency Aid Technische lice. Nothilfe Office of Voluntary Schutzpolizei Firemen and Order Police training schools. 2. General In spector of the Gendarmerie and   Office  Office Office Office Office Office Office Office Office of Law Command  of Amt Amt Amt Amt Amt  the local Pro   Amt & Administra Office  Buildings I II in IV V VI  tion Amt Kommandoamt  tection Police   Amt  VerwaltUng und Handles   Adminis Investi German Com Com Foreign  3. General In Bauten  Recht all matters   tration gation Vital bating bating Coun spector of the  Handles concerning   and Law of Areas Oppon rime tries Schools  Matters the    Ver-Oppon Deutsche ents Ver- Aus   concerning Uniformed   waltung ents Lebens- Gegner-brecheis-land 4. General In  police Order Police.   und Gegner-gebiete bektap-bekflmp-spector of the  administration  cS  Recht erfor-fung. fung  fire prevention   legal affairs  schung Formerly Formerly  Office Reich  agencies   and budgetary  matters of   of the Dffice  the Order Police   Secret of the  State riminal  Police Police.  Gestapo., -12 CONFIDENTIAL  maincd cordial. Daluogc maintains close connections with the S3  Police Divisions see below c-7-c-3-o which arc drawn largely from  the Order Police. For unknown purposes he keeps certain formations  of police reservists at his exclusive disposal.  Beside an adjutant four General Inspectors of the Order  Police belong more or less to tho personal entourage of the Chief of  the Order Police.  Z The General Inspectors of the Order  Police -arc directly subordinate to the Chief of the Order Police.  They are l the General Inspector of tho Reich Protection Police   2 tho General Inspector of tho Gendarmerie and tho Local Protection Police o tho General Inspector of tho Police Schools 4 tho General Inspector of tho Fire Prevention Agencies FcuerlHschwosen. 3. The Main Office of tho Order Police - Hauptamt Ordnungspolizoi -under direct command of Daluogc and located in Berlin handles matters concerning the State Police Administration Units Staatlicho Polizoivorwaltungon the Reich Protection Police vV ' the Gendarmerie tho local Protection Police of the Communities   emoinden tho Fire Police and tho Technical Emergency Corps see  chart 1.  Tho subdivisions of the Main Office of the Order Police arc   see dhart 3  a. The Command Office -Kommandoamt handles all matters concerning tho Uniformed Order Police. At present  January 1941 the Chief of tho Command Office is Gencralloutnant  Major General U.S.A. von Bomhard a former army officer and one time adjutant of General von Epp. Tho more important positions in the office arc occupied by some forty or fifty police officers from the rani of colonel to captain and a small group of civilians. b. Colonial Police Offico -Kolonialpolizoiamt - omitted in chart 3. -The creation of this office is indicative of Gorman thoroughness and confidence in tho outcome of the  5393, -13 CONFIDENTIAL  war. In charge of the Office is Generalloutnant Pfoffor-TVildonbruch one-timo General Inspector of the Order Police and subsequently com mander of the SS Police Division during the Western .campaign see be low c-7-c-3-e.   c. Thc Office of Law and Adrainistration -Vorwaltung und Rocht -handles police administration as well as legal and budgetary affairs.  -0-   The Main Office of tho Order Police also controls thirty or forty schools and training institutes a hospital convalescence and recreational centers tho office of Voluntary Firemen Freiwilligo Fouorwohr and the Reich Office of the Technical Emergency Corps  Tochnischc Nothilfe.   o  Inspectors of the Order Police. - One Inspector is assigned to oach Sonior District President Oborpresident or other administrative official of equivalent rank. In his district a Province in Prussia he has charge of all Uniformed Police i.e. Protection Police of tho Reich and Communities Gendar merie Motorized Gendarmerie end Fire Protection Police. Ho is sub ordinate to and an assistant of tho Higher S3 and Police Leader see above 3 b also chart 1.  The Inspector of tho Order Police usually holds tho rank of polico colonel or brevet major general char. Goneralmajor . Sometimes ho is assisted by a staff which may include a major of tho Firo Pro tection Police.  5. The Protection police -Schutzpolizoi is concentrated in the cities while tho rural areas are policed by tho Gendarmerie. The protection police falls into two groups tho Pro 5S93, -14 CONFIDENTIAL  tection Police of the Reich and the Protection Police of the Coramuni   ties or Gemeindepolizei. The latter are appointed by the local mayor.  They are nonetheless closely regulated by the Reich and functionally  a part of the Reich police organization. The Reich Protection Police  on the other hand are found in 13S important cities with State Police Administration Units see Appendix Part 2. In these areas they per  form many police duties within the city and surrounding county Ereis.  The performance of the remaining duties is relegated to the local  Protection Police see chart 1.  a.. Commanders of the Protection Police -   Kommandeure der Schutzpolizei -The protection Police of each State  Police Administration Unit are lod by a Commander. The Commander is  directly subordinate to the head of the Administration Unit see  chart 4.  b. Barracked Protection Police - Kasernierte Schutzpolizei -Most State Police Administration Units have barracked formations of Protection Police. These are composed of younger men who spend a certain number of years in such formations. Thereafter they are transferred to the Police Preceincts and may live at home. The barracked police are organized into centuries liundertschaften and battalions 700 men and regiments. Police battalions numbered as high as 322 have been identified. Also identified were the 32nd 61st 309th and 314th police battalions.  L Local Organization of the Protection Police -The Protection Police in Berlin Vienna and Hamburg are organized into Police Groups Polizeigruppen Police Sections  Polizeiabschnitte Police Precincts Polizeireviere. Elsewhere Sections and Precincts sometimes only Precincts are found.  d . The Typical. Organization of the Police in a Larger German City - see chart 4. Chart 4 indicates the police organization in a city of about 500 000. The city has a State Police Administration Unit led by a Police President. The   5393,   p H td r-J P o dr c f-h c dr co CO  C -I p  ci    0 o lJ H-  O o o  ci co s c o  o 11 o CD l J. b p tr  p CQ  Q b Q  0  d B o c 1-3  dr CD  d  H   o 0 p  d5 H P  CT H O ds o Ha c CD T P hS P  JQ 03  TO dr ro vn O dr P  r 1 H  Ul 1 o o, 16 -CONFIDENTIAL   Praesidial Department of the Unit evolved from what was once the office  of the Police President. The Main Branch of the State Criminal Police  is independent except that it is usually housed in the same building  as the State Police Administration Unit and its Leader is also in  charge of the Criminal Police of the Unit. The Main Branch of the  Gestapo is entirely independent. The same division of tho Adminis tration Police into departments is found in siaaller State Police Ad ministration Units.  e. Phiice Registration of Germans and Foreigners. In most localities of the Reich all inhabitants of a city or area must register with the police. To combat espionage and sabotage the requirements concerning registration have been tightened since tho outbreak of tho war. Thus foreigners must register with tho local police within twenty-four hours after entering a locality Germans must register within three days. Tho same time limits apply to visitors and to individuals changing their address within a city. Most foreigners entering the Reich are provided with a doexment  Passbegleitschein defining the travel route which they may take t This document must be presented to the local police authorities in every locality in which the traveler remains overnight. It is re turned upon leaving the Reich.  In most communities the registration forms are filed al phabetically according to the surname of the registrant. These files are of great use to the military authorities and to agencies gathering statistics or collecting taxes. However they would bo inadequate for making out lists of individuals belonging to the National Socialist Party or its affiliated organisations. In 1958 the Deputy of the Ftthrer Hess requested that information concerning membership in the Party or its subsidiaries bo omitted in. the registration files.  f. Tho National Roster -VoIkskHrtoi. In order to call up'a class of men Jahrgang before the introduction of the National Roster the police had to. roly on public announcements  5893, 17 -CONFIDENTIAL  at tho same time checking the results by going through the police registration files see above c. Since most registration files wore alphabetically arranged this involved an enormous amount of labor and in spite of the great care exercised individuals liable for service wore easily overlooked. To remedy this weakness the National Roster was devised and introduced in tho first part of 1939.  Tho National Roster comprises all people of Gorman nationalit between the ages of 5 and 70. It includes both sexes members of the Armed Forces Labor Service etc. also Jews. The cards for tho National Roster which were filled out by males gathered the following data l date and place of birthj 2 present occupation the occupation for which one was trained 3 whether or not one has a workbook Arboitsbuch j 4 whether or not one is physically in capacitated the degree of incapacitation 5 name indication of whether one is single divorced a widower or married 6 education beyond tho primary schools Volksschulen viz. trade and professiona] schooling college and university field of specialization 7 resi dence abroad exceeding three months purpose ability to speak foreign languages '8 experience and export knowledge in special branches of  industry technique science or agriculture 9 special skills motorcycle automobile driver's license aviation pilot's license riding typing shorthand training in nursing first aid A.R.P. work membership in the Technical Emergency Corps Technische Nothilfe or Red Cross 10 Service in tho Army Navy or Air Force length ani date of service unit in which one last served last rank period of Labor Service if any ll address plus space for future ehangos of address.  On the cards filled out by females the items 1 to 7 aro es  sentially the same as in the case of males tfowevo'r item 5.lists the number of children under fifteen years living at home. This item is to bo taken into account in estimating the availability of women for war work and public sorvico. Item 8 gathers information concerning the knowledge and experience of tho female population in bookkeeping   5 93, CONFIDENTIAL 18  shorthand typing sewing cooking farming gardening factory work  and science. Hie remaining items are essentially the same as In the  case of males except that item 10 lists merely Labor Service.  The primary purpose of the National Roster is to facilitate the rapid induction of certain age-classes of men or women into the Armed Forces Labor Service etc. For this reason the cards of males and females are filed separately. Within each file the cards of all individuals born in the same calendar year are kept in the same com partment. By means of a system -of colored tabs attached to the top of the cards it is possible to segregate for example 'all males born in 1914 and able to speak a foreign language. The National1 Roster is also said to eliminate the possibility of one individual being ear marked for service by several war agencies. In order to keep the National Roster up-to-date it is not centrally located but left in the hands of the State Police Administration Units b-3-f and where these are not established entrusted to the mayors Burgermeister of the Communities. However in Rural Counties Landkreise duplicate cards for the whole county are kept on file by the Landrat. Thus prompt answers can be given to any inquires of the 'military authorities or other governmental agencies.  Slรยง Fire Protection Police -Feuerschutzpolizei. -Until November 1938 the professional fire brigades were exclusively municipal organizations. Their efficiency was largely dependent on the ability or willingness of a municipality to provide adequate funds. Uniformity of training and equipment was lacking. To remedy this serious weakness in the defense of the Reich especially A.R.P. was one of the main purposes of the reorganization inaugurated November 23 1938.  As a result of this and subsequent reorganizations of fire fighting forces of the Reich have been integrated into a national or ganization under the command of the Chief of the Order Police Daluege.   5893, , -20 -CONFIDENTIAL the calls for help concorn firc-fightingj tho remaining calls domanc aid of a technical nature. Thus tho Fire Protection Police render First Aid to the drowning and asphyxiated conduct decontamination and rescue persons caught in debris.  The Fire Protection Police of a community are subordinate  to the mayor in his capacity as local administrator of th'e police   Ortspolizeiverwalter. The officer directly in command of tho Fire Protection Police is termed a Loader Loiter and if he holds tho rank of major or higher he has the additional title of Commander of tho Fire Protection Police. Of fundamental importance especially in  A.R.P. work is the fact that the Leader of tho Fire Protection Police commands not only the Firo Protection Police but also the Toluntary and Obligatory Fire Brigades if such exist in tho same community. In addition Firo Protection Police from neighboring cities can bo called in. During a recent largo-scale attack by the R.A.F. tho Fire Pro tection Police from towns as far distant as 200 miles are said to have come to the assistanco of a raided community. Further centralization of A.R.P. services was achieved recently by the transfer' of tho Aux iliary and Security Service to tho jurisdiction of the Order Police  see b-3-i-3 .  Before the war the strength of personnel and quantity of equipment of German fire-fighting'agencies in the typical larger city would have been considered inadequate measured by American standards. However the quality was high and the damp climate as well as the strict enforcement of building regulations aided in keeping firo damage at a reasonable level. As a result of the war part of the personnel of tho Firs Brigades and Fire Protection Police was lost to the Armed Forces see also c-7-o-3-n . The first British thousand-piano raid on Cologne during which large numbers of incendiary bombs were dropped made a reinforcement of tho fire-fighting agencies imperative. A few days after the Cologne raid Himmler ordered that all Firo Bri gades Foucrwohron bo without delay reinforced to the required poaco    5893, -21  CONFIDENTIAL  time roquirod strength. In addition the porsonnol of Fire Brigades  of areas especially threatened by air-raids was to bo increased to  twenty percent above tho peace-time roquirod strength. Although no  concrete evidence is available it seems probable that tho porsonnol  of the Fire Protection Police has likewise been reinforced. Fire  fighting equipment from former Czechoslovakia is also said to have  been transferred to tho western areas of tho Reich.  According to statute members of the Fire Protection Police  are'to bo pensioned at the age of sixty. At present however firemen  above sixty are known to bo serving. On the other hand tho normal  complement of young and middle-aged fireman has boon seriously depleted  More and more civilians including women and youths arc being pressed  into service'in the Voluntary and Obligatory Fire Brigades.  The officer candidates and noncommissioned officers of tho  Fire Protection police are trained at the Reich Fire Brigade School   Rcichsfouorwchrschulo in Eborswalde. Tho same institution conducts  ' s-----------post- graduate courses for officers of .the Fire Protection Police and for higher loaders of tho Voluntary Fire Brigades. The Reich Fire Brigade School serves at the same time as a research and testing laboratory for fire-fighting methods and typos of equipment. The contribution to tho war effort made by regiments of Fire Protection Police operating with tho Armed Forces is treated elsewhere c-7-c-e-n-l .  7. The Gendarmerie -is that branch of tho Order Police principally concerned with law onforcomont in rural areas. Tho organization of tho Gendarmerie is shown in chart 5 a.. Tho Alpine Gendarmerie -Hochge   birgsgondarmorio -is that subdivision of tho Gendarmerie operating in alpine areas. Special alpine training is given in Tyrol to members of the Order Police thus providing trained police personnel for Norway and other occupied alpine regions.   5393, -22 CONFIDENTIAL  Paragraph 25 Chart 5. The Vertical Organization of the Gendarmerie within tho Area of a Higher Police Authority.  b. Tho Motorized Gendarmerie Motorisio'rto Gendarmerio -is that branch of tho Gondarmerie charged with tho supervision of traffic on tho main roads. It is housed in barracks. In tho summer of 1940 it comprised three sections Abteilungon and fifty-two Task Units Boroitschaften. Task Units are assigned to tho Higher Police Authorities and subordinated to the Commanders of the Gendarmerie Tho personnel of the Motorized Gendarmerie is said to be drawn almost exclusively from tho storm troop or dotachmonts SA.  5393, -23 CONFIDENTIAL  T'he Commanders of the Gendarmerie - Kommandeure der Gendarmerie -command the Gendarmerie in the territories of the Higher Police Authorities see b-3-g-l. They are subordinate to the Higher Police Authorities.  jd. The Leaders of the Gendarmerie Captainships. -The Gendarmerie within the territory of a Higher Police Authority is organized into formations called Gendarmerie-Hauptnannschaften or Gendarmerie Captainships. In command of such a unit is a Gendarmerie-Hauptmannschaftsfiihror.  e. The Leader of the County Gendarmerie -Gendarmerie-Kreisftilirer commands the Gendarmerie in a rural county  Landkreis.  d The Security Police -Sicherheitspolizei Sipo -constitute one of the most important bulwarks of the National Social ist regime They are subdivided into two branches l the Criminal Police engaged in the prosecution of ordinary crime ' 2 the State Police which includes the Secret Police Gestapo and which is charged with the prosecution of political offences and the preservation of the National Socialist system.  The mission of the Security Police and Security Service coin cides in many respects. It is both domestic and foreign. The domestic mission included or includes surveillance of the Jews Communists Free Masons Rotary Club denominational youth organizations dmigrds the combating of sabotage terror and espionage the organization of a frontier police the protection of youth the prosecution of homo sexuals the combating of abortion the enforcement of legislation for the purity of the German race.  The foreign mission is not loss important. In fact the Chief of the Security Police arid Security Service received public commendation for his share in facilitating the Gorman invasion of Austria the Sudotenland and Bohomia-Moravia. To this list should bo added Poland and other invaded countries. It seems that the Security Police and Service prepare strategic surveys of areas marked for invasion. Persons and   5893, -24 -CONFIDENTIAL  Organizations of special interest are carefully investigated e.g. the Czech Legion. Units of Security Police and Security Service then  follow on the heels of the invading forces and execute their well   laid plans.  The Security Police publicly admits very close relations with countries friendly toward Germany The liaison officer from the Italian Police .is Ciavechini. Recently the Reich sent a Police Attachi Colonel Schroeder to its Lisbon Legation. Schroeder is assisted by Major Hellmuth who also has a diplomatic passport. Those Roich officials represent presumably not .only the interests of tho Security Police but those of the Order Police as well.  1. Tlie Chief of tho Security Police and Security Service -Chef der Sioherheitspolizei und des SD. -is the commanding officer of the Security Police and Security Service He is directly subordinate to the Reich Leader of the SS and Chief of the German Police. Since its creation this dual office was occupied by Heydrich until his assassination. Heydrich at one time a Gorman naval officer for radio and communications attained the rank of Lieutenant j.g.  Oberleutnant zur See before 'ho loft the service. Himmler brought him to Munich and made him July 1932 chief of the intelligence ser vice SD. TJhcn Himmler was appointed Deputy Chief of the Secret State Police Heydrich became head of tho Gestapo. Hoydrich seems to have been a man of boundless energy keen intelligence and inflexible de termination. His position mil not bo easily filled as it requires both extraordinary loyalty and ability. A reorganization is quite possible.  2. Tho Main Office for tho Security of tho Reich -Reichssicherhoitshauptamt -is concerned with functions of the Chief of the Security Police and Security Service within tho Reich Ministry of Interior. It is subdivided into six offices Aomter  I Administration and Law ll Investigation of Opponents ill Gcr 5393, . .. -25-confidential man Vital Areas IV 'Combating Opponents formerly tho Office of the  Secret State Police or Gestapo V Combating Crime formerly the Reich  Office of the Criminal Police VI Foreign Countries. See chart 3.  'A  The Main Office for the Security of tho Reich controls several police  training schools  รยฐ Inspectors of the Security Police and  Security Service -Inspokteuro dor Sichorheitspolizci und des SD. -   One Inspector is stationed in each Corps Area. Ho is subordinate to the  Higher Leader of tho SS and Police'. He takes directives from tho Senior  District President Oberprftsidbnt or those of equivalent rank outside  of Prussia as far as such instructions harmonize with instructions  of tho Chief of the Security Police and Security Service.. He keeps  in-touch with the Senior District President informs him.of the obser  vations and operations of tho Security Police and Security Service  makes suggestions for tho authorities of tho General and. Internal Ad  ministration. He is the leader and trainer of the Security Police  within his Corps Area-. Tho attachment of. the Inspector of the Security  Police and Security Service seemingly as a political advisor to the  staff the Senior District President appears to bo a recent development. .It.may be interpreted as a further extension of Himmler's influence on  the general administration of the Reich.  4. Tho State Griminal Police -Staatlicho Krimino-1po1izoiorKripo-isthatbranchoftheSecurityPoliceen gaged in combating' ordinary non-political crime. The organizational apex of the Reich criminal police system is Office V Verbrechensbekfimpfung or Combating Crime of the Main Office for the Security of the Reich. This office is sometimes designated as the Office of the Reich Criminal Police Reiohskriminalpolizeiamt . The regional organization comprises eighteen Criminal Police Main Branches Kriminalpolizeileitstellen forty-six Criminal. Police Branches Kriminalpolizoistellen and sixty-nine Criminal Departments ivriminalnbteilungen the latter as departments of the State Police Administration Units. The Criminal  5893, -26 -CONFIDENTIAL Police of a' State Police Administration Unit and a Branch of the Crimi nal Police located in the same city are under the leadership of the  same person thus insuring coordination between both organizations  see chart 4. A Main Branch of the Criminal Police supervises all agencies engaged in the prosecution of crime within its territory.   See Appendix Part 3 for the location of State Criminal Police  Branches.  The State Criminal Police lay much stress on ultra-modern methods. At the beginning of 1942 a Criminal-Biological Institute ms founded in Berlin Kriminalbiologisches Institut der Sicherheitspolizei im Reichskriminalpolizeiamt. The purpose of the Institute is to render both practical assistance to the Criminal Police and conduct scientific research into biological factors affecting criminality. The Institute intends to assign a specialist in crimino.1 genealogy to the Main Branches and ordinary Branches of the State Criminal Police.  A special school for training Criminal Police exists at Ber1in- Charlottenburg Kriminalfachschule dor Sjcherhoitspolizei . The integrity of the personnel employed in the Criminal Police is considered to bo especially high.  5. The State Police and Secret State Police - Staatspolizel or Stapo and Goheimo Staatspolizoi or Gestapo -is that branch of the Security Police engaged in the. prevention and prosecution of political offences. The Gestapo was founded by GBring in 1933 sec b-1. Prior to 1933 Political Police existed as.a Special Department of the various municipal Police Presidios. GBring separated these departments from the Police Presidios in Prussian cities and organized them centrally into the Secret State Police. In 1933 the most important department of the Gestapo was the one for combating Bolshevism. The' executive am of the Gestapo at that time was the Protection Police Detachment for Special Purposes Schutzpolizeiabteilung z.b.V. consisting of specially se lected officers under Police Colonel Wecke.   5893, -27 CONFIDENTIAL  The-Gostapo onforoes legislation concerning treason open and covert opposition to tho State and National Socialist Party Military service and morale economic sabotage foreign exchange restrictions and foreign radio broadcasts. It is concerned with any act having political significance o.g. certain murders. The Gestapo enjoys wide discretionary powers in taking precautions against politically dangerous individuals. These measures range from warnings to the dispossession of property and pc rsonal freedom concentration camp. Decisions of the Gostapo are exempt from review by an administrative tribunal. Gostapo personnel is now drawn largely from tho SS Schutz- Staffol The Main'Offico for the .Security of the Reich and in par ticular Office IV Gegnerboldimpfung or Combating of Opponents con stitute tho apex of tho Gestapo. The regional organization consists of sovontcen Main Branches Stautspolizcileitstollen at the seats of the Senior District Presidents or officials of equal rank outside of Prussic and fifty-four ordinary Branches Staatspolizeistellen at tho seats of officials of the next lower rank. This includes also an ordinary Branch in Prague and Brtlnn Brno. The head Loiter of an ordinary Branch acts as political roportor and advisor politischer Sachbearbeiter or Referent to the District President or Government of the Land Landesrogiorung or Roichsstattheltor reporting on matters of concern to tho political police. Tho head of a Main Branch fulfills tho same function for administrative executives on a higher level Senior District Presidents etc. Gestapo tasks within tho city and county of the seat of a State Police Branch are performed by officials  of tho Branch. Elsewhere tho ordinary local and county police may bo charged with tho performance of Gostapo tasks. Also ordinary Branches and Main Branches nay create outposts AussenstelIon according to their needs. Theso as well as Frontier Police Commissariats Grenzpolizcikfemnissariato and Frontier Police Posts Grcnzpolizeipostcn remain integral parts of tho Branches and Main Branches. The dominant influonco in tho issuance of passports and visas as woll as in tho rogu    5893, -28 CONFIDENTLIL  lati.m of foreign residents is exorcised by the Security Police. See Appendix Part 4 for location of Gostapo Branches and Main Branches.  Officers of the Security Police are trained at the Officers' School in Bcrlin-Charlottonburg FUhrcrschulc dor Sichorhoitspolizoi . Presumably in order to provide more training facilities for the larger numbers entering the Security P lico and in particular the Gestapo branch a Reich School of the Security Police and Security Service   Roichsschulo dor Sicherhoitspolizoi und dos SD. was opened at Prague early in 1942.  a. The Frontier Police -Grenzpolizei is a special branch of the Gestapo. The Frontier Police stand watch on the boundaries of the Reich proper and at the most remote frontiers of German Europe from the Bay of Biscay to the North Cape. They in spect the papers of individuals crossing the border enforce export import and foreign exchange rogulations search trains and other vehicles. They are assisted by customs officials the Gendarmerie branch of the Order Police in certain areas by storm troops SA and probably at times by military formations. A special school Grenzpolizeischule at Pretsch on the Elbe trains the Frontier Police.   e The Sepurity Service of the SS Reich Leader 'L si  Sicherheitsdienst des Reiohsf ihrers SD.RF. lj Ij -The National Socialist Party had in the course of its development a number of in telligence agencies e.g. the1intelligence service of the SA. How ever the intelligence service of the SS or the Security Service of the SS Reich Leader gradually gained ascendancy. This development culmi nated in the prohibition of all Party intelligence agencies except the Security Service June 9 1934. This occurod in connection with Blood Purge of June 30 1934. The best evidence of the high esteem which the SD.RF. Lj now enjoys is the fact that the personal pro tection of the Fllhrer is entrusted to the Reich Security Service   Reichssicharhoitsdienst or RSD.   5893, -29-  Paragraph 25 Chart 6 SD. MAIN SECTIONS CONFIDENTIAL SD. SECTIONS Allenstein Tilsit Neustettin Schwerin Frankfurt a.O. Potsdam Leipzig Chemnitz Halle a S.  Neustadt a.d.W. ' Darms'fadt Bielefeld Hoftmun3 Aachen Cologne Koblenz  Frankfurt a.i Kassel  Braunschvreig Weimar Dessau  j Augsburg WUrzburg  Mrnberg  BayrouthT Karlsbad  Troppau Liegmtz Kattowitz Cppeln  Kiel Llineburg Bremen  Linz Salzburg Graz Innsbruck KLagenfurt  Thorn Hohensalza Lit zmannstadt   5S93, -30 - CONFIDENTIAL I  Today the SD.RF. lj lj functionally the intelligence service  of the National Socialist Party. Organizationally it is a branch of  the SS. It is charged with the detection aid observation of all forces  events and facts affecting the supremacy of the Party. See also  d-Security Police. Typical Organization  The organization of the of an SD Main Section and  SD.Rff. I /j xs built around a cadre SD Section  of full-time paid staffs assisted  CO by honorary collaborators chrOnarat-CO 0  o3 ft   . -P ft  liche Mitarbeiter of the SS. This  CO  Q  a  ft  O Q HO -pft   H S enables the S3 and Party to keep in ra -P -r\ I CO  Q -P ft CD I co ii cd ft a.  O close touch with the pulse of the  ft -d  o  H ch o ft ft nation. The SD.EF. registers Q   H cd co ro'  cd H    H ftH  Q ci5  rl o   each slight variation of public sen CO On ft o  timent. favorable or unfavorable to  the Party and roports almost daily  CO co u  to high state and Party officials o o  -p ft COcti cocd CO CO  Statthalter and Gauleiter. Not in O O TJ ft ft  H 03 H cd ctiH cdH frequently those roports cause a modi ft iI ft ii  O O    ftO ftO fication of policy.  ft   The Chief of the SD. is also ft ft  oj Cd the Chief of P ft   CO CO  the Security Police and as such in   o    รยฐ รยฐ3    H -r-l H charge of the Main Office for Security -P ft ft ft oI O1 CDH 0 rH CO CO r j  of the Rcioh Roichssichorhcitshauptnmt .   ft Q ft co CO- Certain matters concerning the SD. are ft ft   H  H ctf cd  ft Ph handled in the Main Office for Security of  tho eich. Also the regional Inspectors  of tho Security Police are at the same  time inspectors of the regional SD. II   ft ft    co O ft   see Chart 2. Thus it appears that it  CO CO   o O would have boon relatively easy to have ft ft ft ft  co CO effected a complete amalgamation of the See Chart 6   5S93, -31 -CONFIDENTIAL  Rcioh Security Police with tho SD of the SS. Nevertheless the SS continues to maintain a separate SS headquarters for the SD. viz. tho Main Office for Security Sicherhcits-Hauptomt at Berlin SW 68  Wilhelmstrasse 102 early 1941 . Moreover tho personnel of tho Main Office for Security Sicherhoits-Hauptamt appears to be quite nu merous as most of the buildings from 100 to 106 Wilhelmstrasse are occupied by tho SD. Tho dual headquarters of tho SD. entail less in convenience than appears on tho surface. The Reich headquarters of tho Security Police are only around tho corner in the Prinz-idLbrocht- Strassc. Both hoadquarters are also connected by a garden in tho rear.' One obvious advantage of maintaining the SD. as a somi-indepondent organization is that it can bo used to check the efficiency and re liability of tho Secret State Polico Gestapo . In addition it would facilitate tho separation of SD. from the Security Police should this becomo expedient on political or organizational grounds.  The regional organization of tho SD.RF. consists of sixteen SD. Main Sections SD.-Leitabschnitte and forty-ono SD. Sections SD.-Abschnitto . See chart 6. SD. outposts aro es tablished a.S 'needed.  Tho Communications Department of tho Norwegian Hird Hirdstabens cftorretningsavdcling is organized along linos similar to the German SD.RF. and the German Security Police. See c-9.   f The State Police administration Units - Staatlichc Polizoivorwaltungon -aro located in metropolitan and indus trial areas in frontier cities and ports of entry also in other dif ficult and important districts. By August 1941 one hundred and thirty throe units had been established thus bringing these vital areas under the direct control of the Reich polico see list in the Appendix Part 2. A unit of the State Polico generally includes administrative offi cials Verwaltungspolizci Criminal Polico Krininalpolizei and Pro tection Polico Schutzpolizoi. See chart 4. In ascending ordor of im portance a unit designated l as a Police Office -Polizoiamt 2 a Iblicc  5893, -33-OONFIDEMTXA.L Direction -Polizeidirektion 3 a Police Presidio -PolizeiprSsidium. There are seventy-four Presidios forty-two Directions and ten Offices also seven units directed by Land Councillors Landrflte. The Police  Presidents in charge of the Presidios in large cities were in 1933  among the first officials to be replaced by loyal National Socialists. Much is dependent on their decisions in preventing disorder and in  cipient revolution.  Within the city and. county of a State Police Administration Unit the police functions within this area are divided between the State Police and the local police. The local police are allowed to perform the functions which promote public welfare such as enforcing trade health sanitary building and school regulations as well as to polico tho fields and forests. While performing these functions tho local polico are subordinato to the local police authorities. The State Polico on tho other hand assume the protection of the state and tho individual.   g Polioo Authorities -Certain officials of the general and internal administration exorciso together with other func tions also police functions. They are accordingly designated as Police Authorities.  1 The Higher Police Authorities -HBhero PolizeibehBrdon -are the District Presidents of Prussia and elsewhere the officials or agencies of equivalent rank see list in the Appendix Part 1.  2. The County Police Authority -KreispolizeibohBrde -is the Land Councillor Landrat in a Rural County  landkreisj in a City County Stadtkrois the Lord Mayor Oberblirgermeister. Tho Land Councillor exorcises his police functions through   l the Reich Gendarmerie and 2 through the Local Police Authorities  OrtspolizoibohBrden within the Rural County viz. the mayors Bttrgermoister. Tho Lord Mayor OborbUrgormoister of a City County exer cises his county police functions through.the city police. These are   5893, -34 -   COI FIDEMTIA  appointed by him. He is subject to the supervision of the Higher  Police Authority. In counties with State Police Administration Units  there are two County Police Authoritiess 1 the administrator of the  State Police Unit Police President Police Director Police Councillor  or Land Councillor 2 the regular County Police Authority. Each  is the County Police Authority for the share of police functions per formed by his police forces.  Local Police Authority -Ortspolizei   behBrde -is in a community Gemeinde located within a Rural County  as a rule the mayor of the community Bilrgemeister. He appoints  the community police officers. In a City County the Local Police  Authority is the Lord Payor Oberbllrgermeister. In cities with State  Police Administration Units there are two Local Police Authorities   l the administrator of the State Police Unit 2 the regular Local Police Authority. Each is Local Police Authority for that share of the police functions performed by his.police forces.  h Special Police -Sonderpolizei -Within the Reich there are a number of special police formations or officials exercising certain police powers. Functionally these are a part of the centrally controlled police organization. ' Railway Police -Bahnpolizei - The employees of the railways vested with the power of temporary arrest are quite numerous. Within this larger group there seem to have been in August 1939 about G 000 men devoting their entire time to police duties. There is a railroad guard formation in each of the sjreas .into -which the Gorman railroad system is divided. Units are armed with rifles and .light and heavy machine guns. They are subject  to the .supervision -of.the Reich Transport Minister j.H. Dorpmilller. IXiringf.tlje-..-war -.-storm troop detachments SA have also been employed in-guarding railway installations.   i 2. The Post Guards -Postschutz protect postal communications which include tho telephono and telegraph systems. Tho personnel of the Post Guards is drawn from-post office  5E-93,  T x A- V Vu vf   Wnv.on Pi 4o fU. tewftx u Jejy tj kt b i o Cjr& e ' JL XtQf Z C JL f S- 4a. b. ./ ' / - -tfvv uv f u b b -A c .k is\ L K\ f2 u v v L er -t \aJ o ft f u eLcx JiZibjsr fke  aM-t'. \ W vn - iteLpt /Li dl -Gj t J UK 7 t o jL PS'Ctit 4. sl z U J s\ i i j- d  U C& a w /ta PH yp 1 1 4. & i .tA f o jiyiA IjL s\ OJ yi\iJ JL -jJt b W tcf f /\ Hs a Jt 'U&- fbi ft '-'bt 4. v Jk ft.4frv fi. t-taJ'fi aa 4 - -w  U u a .a a i .  -At % Kfl/ /2-lfcA /k4 - s lei -p.e   pszyv ru Jitu .n rit..r/ 4 . /. a t.  2jJ\asJL tfb juL \Ka jMjuA. 4 8 t tfLAb %J A e - -44 f - 4 JVIA  c4jla sk   r . -t UL VA a/i7 B TPwct K'sGMeQ /S H Ji P - U [CdOG-ifi ' lsJ / lA 6fil&& C--t-Ce&foAHtb Uvo t-4tv/ CUV  /b 0hjl 4 KT\ J v/ttwfcw4j J C . Ut xM bt A. tix. 9 \p4c t -4 c o.vhaA 4p u v Jt\ p f 4W\P i  4AX Cu XX.  Out U J/ fp S x. ' LrvJf t t\A-%. -ta รยง A 0 Wvu AAly f Q r no 7tx-u Htxv ixyJw ap-va u -evwife  Otv jj -JJ ij /vW' v A fl Tvflj J  kAyJAA y ft\A. T f/vCt -J ''f  / maa pa -tUx fLo h c 2 -J p hJ X ao a. xTLu . 'Tc Lpua Ws axA 2 n a A Msn x รยฐy / J, Cs. 'S c&Asi i ASbCijJlyof/i -t  N r  Ref.  SL  & W\  1  p   i No. Asm AJts\ si l tU-oiU/r  4vt V-  T-tA.  U&\  ct scheduleStore movement  J A VVt 1 / Description of packages and contents.  Consignor. UltimateConsignee.. SHIPPING ADVICE AND DELIVERY NOTE Continuation Sheet No or W.5170.  i%    2 Item No. /L 4u. oUa C-v ft  ' l  X  r  TV  e  -6a.   av nxsy / \ JU ew M-t. U-v f st. V djl.  f n . ''bJ. cb 1   3 4 5 6 7 ii Shipping Tons.Weight. Where stowed. Port ofShipment. Port of Discharge No.of  5 t3 C/3  6 I riAVO o Tons.Ft.Shipped.  ages. Marks.Pack Convoy. Sub. ConvoyNo. p   og-  B  Scrf o, ,  36  CONI11PEN3 141  police for the military forces .for Police Battalions and for train ing courses. Police Reservists serve in the Reich 'in occupied areas and on the front. The average age of police reserves called up in September 19S9 seems to have been about thirty-five. The proportion of'Reservists to active police in .one 'Bremen precinct-Twas 12 to 8. The  training of pre-war Reservists was obtained on Sundays and in evening study. It was largely military. Police Reservists called to duty in the precincts were subsequently given courses in law. At present  spring of 1941 thore are barracked formations of Police Reservists organized into Police Battalions Police' Training Battalions and Police Centuries Polizcieinsatzhundcrtschaften. Certain formations of Police Reservists arc subordinate only to the Chief of the Order Police.  2 . Auxiliary Police -Hilfspolizei or Hipo -   After the conquest of Poland ex-Poles of German stock were enlisted as auxiliary police. German police on'patrol duty in the cities were accompanied by an auxiliary policeman armed with a rifle. Facilities for training auxiliary police exist in Litzmannstadt Posen and.else where.  3. The Air Raid Precaution Police - Luftschutzpolizoi -formerly The Auxiliary and Security Service Slcherheits- und Hilfsdienst or SEP. After the first thousand-plane raid actually 906 planes on. Cologne-GBring transferred the command of the SHOD of the First Category I. Ordnung to the Reich Leader of the SS and Chief of the .German Police' Himmler June 1 1942 . The SHD. of the First Category comprises units organized by the Reich Author ities for work in the more important areas. This branch of the SHD. was thon subordinated to the Order Police under Daluege and renamed the Air Raid Precaution Police Luftschutzpolizoi . GBring still remains in charge of all civil A.R.P. services.. The new Air. Raid Precaution'Police are chiefly engaged in fire-fighting decontamination demolition and rescue work. A con 5893, -37 -CONFIDENTIAL  siderable portion of the A.R.P. Police is housed in barracks. There are also-'Motorized Battalions  Abteilungen mot.  . The personnel includes both sexes and is drawn from those obligated to perform A.R.P. service Luftschutzdienstpflichtige . This obligation extends to all who are physically and mentally fit and not needed for other war-important purposes. Thus men can be drafted and be sent to another locality where they render full-time service. An analysis of A.R.P. Police personnel July 1942 based on insuffi cient data indicates that the ages of males serving is between 39 and 54 and averaging about 45. Every individual in the group was married and had several children. However none of those apparently rendering part-time service was engaged in a war-important occupation.  4. The Technical Emergency Corps -Teohnisa Nothilfe also TN or Teno -is controlled by the Order Police. Its purpose is to provide essential services during emergencies. It is distributed throughout the Reich and German-occupied areas. It suppli trained personnel for the repair and supervision of power plants water works canal locks bridges etc. It identifies and disposes of'mines old munitions duds as well as damaged structures dangarou to the public. Its personnel also includes divers experts in de contamination and fire fighting. As an adjunct to the Commander of the Order Police in the Government General a TN Command Office is  established in charge of all TN units within the Government General.  An analogous set-up probably exists in other conquered territories.  Located at the seat of the TN Command Office in Cracow is an elaborati  equipped TN-Bereitsehaftshaus comprising repair shops garages and re  placement supplies. Personnel of. the TN has been organized into Tech  nical Batallions for the armed forces.  Early in 1942 the' strength of the TN was presumably about  100 000 members most of whom were engaged in passive A.R.P. duties L  Germany. TN personnel is limited to specialists. The male contingen  ts composed largely of men who arc part-time volunteers of the older   5393, 38 CONFIDENTIAL  ago groups ivho have cither hoen deferred or have already performed military service.  5. Storm Trooper Detachments -Stum-Abteilungen or SA.. -aid the police by guarding railways bridges roads communication facilities and prisoners regulating traffic on arterial highways used by military transports assisting in air raid protection countering hostile propaganda helping in evacuation protecting supplies in evacuated areas. 6. The National Socialist Motor Corps - Nationalsozialistischos Kraftfahrorkorps or NSKK -turned over to the police a number of NSKK Traffic Companies These regulated traffic in Polish cities and in the country put up German-language sign-posts at important crossroads served as police couriers made arrests of murderers and saboteurs. In the Western Campaign NSKK Traffic Squads piloted large troop transports through the cities and took precautions at dangerous points on the highways. Some NSKK-men were detached to strengthen the Motorized Gendarmerie. 7. The SS or Elite Guard -Dchutz-Staffel provides the regular police personnel the Security Service SD and can be mobilized at any time as a police auxiliary in maintaining pub lic order and the National Socialist system. At the express order of the Ftthrer the SS and Police are to combat subversive elements and consolidate the National Socialist regime in newly conquered areas. Close coordination between police and SS is insured by the fact that the Reich Leader of the SS is Chief of the German Police.  4 Personnel -The avowed aim of elements determining police policy is to recruit l the lower ranks non-commissioned officers and men from the SS Combat Divisions 2 the commissioned officers from the SS Junker Schools In line with this policy re cently commissioned police officers arc being commissioned at the same time as officers of tho SS. Promotion in the police organization is V5 ' ' accompanied by promotion to equivalent rank in the SS. All full-time   5893, -39 -CONFIDENTIAL  employees of the S3 the S3 Combat Divisions and other armed formations  of the S3 together with all Security Police Security Service men and formations of the Order Police are exempt frpra courts-martial and subje to a special system of S3 and Police courts. Beginning with the Chief of the German Police and including the higher police officials the per sonal union between SS and poliop has become practically complete. Nevertheless it was estimated in 1939 that about one-third of the police personnel was being drawn from rotired aiyny non-commissioned officers. Police not yet members of the S3 are gradually being ab  sorbed into this organization. The indoctrination of the police with  SS ideals is continuous and persistent.  Police personnel apparently receives excellent training. There are special schools for officers for Protection Police Gendar merie Waterways Protection Polico Traffic Police Criminal Police Frontier Police as well as a Technical School a Riding Academy a School for First Aid a School of Athletics and a School for Alpine Training. In the spring of 1941 a School for Colonial Police was opened. The German police have superb discipline and good physique. They are almost without exception incorruptible. A certain degree of economic security is enjoyed by even the lowest ranks   5 Police Control over Outlying Groups and Areas - In the sparsely populated districts of the Reich which are not ad jacent to an international frontier the police control exercised by the Gendarmerie must have been reduced somewhat as a result of shortage of personnel and of gasoline. However it is judged to be still quite effective. On the other hand police control of the German frontiers i believed to be moro effectively organized today than prior to the out break of the war. Recently the Danish equivalent of the Marine Coast Police soo above 3-i-6 was greatly reinforced. This reinforcement is believed to correspond to a similar reinforcement of the Gorman Marine Coast Police in anticipation of an attempted invasion from tho West. The regional subordination of the police and police auxiliarios  5S93, -40 -CONFIDENTIAL  to the command of the Corps Area Higher SS and Police Loader should  enable a prompt mobilization of available forces to meet any armed  incursion ses above 3-bo   6 Tho Gorman Police Occupied Areas - see above 3-bo More information on tho organization of the Gorman Police in tho Government General is obtainable than for other occupied areas.  see chart 7. ' According to available data tho pattern of the Govern/  ment General seems to have been used in the Baltic States. The highes'  degree of autonomy in police affairs appears to have been granted to Denmark. On the other hand as far as is known the Gormans have not been able in any conquered country so far to dispense entirely with  police auxiliaries recruited from the native population.   5893, Paragraph 25 Chart 7.  Each District is subdivided usually into ten counties Kreise. The civil administration of a county   Haupt-und Hilfsztige  40. Order Police. The German Police in the Government General  including the police operations of the rural constabulary or Gendarmerie is directed by the County Captain  Kreishauptmann. At his disposal are smaller units of Gendarmerie -Main Platoons and uxiliary Platoons  -also the Special Service Sonderdienst composed of male racial Germans from 18 to  All the units of the Gendarmerie within a District are under command of the District Commander of the, -42 CONFIDENTIAL Paragraph 25. PublioQOrder Police and the Elite Guard S3 .  c. The S3 or Elite Guard - Sohutz-Staffeln. - l General Observations. S3 penetration of the German police has been going on since 1953. Fusion of personnel functions and even of organization has resulted. Indeed the German police seem destined to become a depart ment of a larger S3 organization. No analysis of the German police is complete without a discussion of the 33.  The National Socialist Party is a state within a state the S3 a party within the Party. The National Socialist Party contains many opportunists of doubtful loyalty. It lacks the homogeneity singleness of purpose completeness of conviction needed to make it a reliable instrument in the hands of the Filhrer. Such an instrument Hitler has found in tho S3. Through it he maintains his grip on Party and State.  The SS was created by Hitler iri 1925 as a squad of eight men to protect the Piihror and Party speakers from physical violence. Its  choicest task still is the protection of the Ftthrer To this mission have been added tho protection of the German nation its blood and unity maintenance of internal security protection of Party leaders guaran teeing and strengthening Part5r control of Germany finally the mission of developing expanding and enforcing National Socialist doctrines as a world movement. To fulfill these missions tho SS has successively developed an intelligence service a police force and a closed com munity for the practice of National Socialist eugenics. It is now rapidly creating an army.  The SS seeks to bo the vehicle for realizing the purest National Socialist ideals. It accepts no compromiso. It is fanatical in its loyalty to Hitler. It is outspoken in its criticism of business men judges oven Party measures. Criticism of tho S3 weekly newspaper. Das Schwarze Korps circulation in 1939 over one half million often heralds coming changes.   5393, , -43 -CONFIDENTIAL  The SS is a sworn enemy of bureaucracy and red tape. SS economists say bureaucracy lacks initiative. They maintain that privat initiative is the source of economic progress'. In the post-war eco nomic New Order they demand a place for private initiative so that genius for invention and organization may develop unhampered. On the other hand they reject the ''plutocratic socio-economic system in which wealth confers social status and lust for money shapes tho economic s Euciiyrd In the .post-war economy the SS envisages prices and the consumption of goods controlled by the State in a manner that the standards of living will depend only on tho sums paid for wages and the cost of raw materials and not on the profit lust of specu lators department store proprietors and cartels.  Other pet hates and aversions of the SS are the Jews Free Masons humanitarians capitalists Americans British Russians even Germans who do not conform to SS concepts. SS veterans of the Russian campaign however seem to harbor a secret admiration for the courage of the Soviet soldier. Soldiers of the British and French army do not command this respect.  America as portrayed by Das Schwarze Korps is a plutocracy populated by fast-living slow-thinking Yankees under the domination of the Jews and the House of Morgan. The country is crime-ridden and tho population consists mainly of starving farmers and unemployed inhabitants of slums. The average American has only such ideals as he can conceive of in terms of dollars and cents. American intervention in this war can tet best postpone but for a few months the ultimate German victory.  The SS is a sharp critic of religious denominations  suspoctod of political aims. Especially actions or tendencies of religious denominations which may affect national unity meet with stern rebuke. SS men on the other hand are expected to bolievo in God and the divine mission of the Ftthrer. ihe SS man may secure im mortality through his posterity. Each is expected to have children and   5C93, CONFIDENTIAL    44 thus contribute to the eternal life of his clan Sippe and of the nation.  The SS is distinguished by its 'vigorous application and de velopment of National Socialist racial theories. Since Himmler be came head of the organization in 1929 selection of SS members is based on physical stature and other Nordic qualities of the applicants. They must measure for most formations of the Military SS at least 5 ft. G.9 ins. in exceptional cases 5 ft. 6.1 ins. For the SS- Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler 5 ft. 10.9 ins. is the minimum. Leaders or officers must trace their Aryan origin as far back as 1750 other ranks as far as 1000. Achievement tests of physical agility and will power must be passed annually by SS members especially officers. The fiancie of 1 SS man must meet SS eugenic standards. Men who marry unacceptable women are dropped from the organization. In the course of centuries a.super-race of Nordic elite is to be developed by means of progressive eugenic selection.  A corollary to this policy is the emphasis on large SS families. This is designed to combat the dysgenic affect of small families among the German middle and upper classes at the same tin offsetting the docline in. birth-rate due to the war. There is con vincing evidence that the more prosperous SS elements are now having larger families. Cooperative institutions of the SS provide advan tageous living conditions.  Since 1937 the now SS aristocracy has striven for a fusion with the old Gorman nobility. The Junkers or sons of the German no bility are welcomed into the organization and are now found in quite largo numbers. Several high SS loaders have married into noble fam  ilies. The union of the SS with the-younger generation of nobility  incidentally prevents the fonaation of the latter into a class holding  itself aloof from National Socialism. Exceptionally largo numbors  of Gorman university graduates are also included in the ranks of the  SS.   5393,   -45 -CONFIDENTIAL  Tho S3 is governed by a strict code of honor. Sec bolow G-i. The S3 man not only may but must defend his honor in armed com bat. Ho also enjoys many privileges among -which is tho right to listen to foreign broadcasts as well as to road foreign newspapers and magazines.  In pursuance of its racial idoals tho S3 plays a loading part in tho so-called morcy killings of tho insane and incurably ill. It is also prominent in the persecution and expulsion of the Jew from Germany and German-occupied territories. With the appointment after tho defeat of Poland of Himmler as J eich Commissar for the Strengthening of German Folkdom tho S3 assumed the dominant role in tho colonization of conquered areas. In this connection between 500 000 and 600 000 racial Germans from abroad have boon resettled in Rcich-controlled territories. The S3 maintains intimate relations with the Rcichsarboitsgomeinschaft fttr Raumforschung a national re sources planning board. It also has close connections with the Reich Ministry of Food and Agriculture. In S3 ideology exalted status is accorded to tho farmer. Certain categories of Military S3 after com pletion of their military service may become Wehrbauern defence fanners and receive a piece of land in the eastern marches of the Reich. See below 4-h-4.  The S3 touches all phases of its members' lives. Before the S3 child is born his father and mother have complied with S3 racial and eugenic standards. If tho infant is a fourth or fifth child ho probably owes his very existence to S3 propaganda for large families. He is born in a S3 Mothers Homo. Ho is delivered by an S3 physician. His parents give him a pure Germanic name. The home of his parents if often a new S3 apartment house located in a suburban S3 settlement. Tho streets arc named Staffelweg Dienstweg or Imn Kinderland. Such S3 settlements exist in Borlin-Lchlendorf Oranienburg Weimar SchBnbrurm-Vionna 87 Graz-Wotzelsdorf and perhaps else where. Tho health of a child from an S3 family is guarded by S3 doc    5893, 46 CONFIDENTIAL tors or dentists. He often receives his high school and junior college training at a Napola school in which SS ideas aro taught.  Ho does not perform his military service with the regular armed forces aas do other Germans. Instead he enters a unit of the Military SS. Here his indoctrination with SS ideas is much more in tensive than in the regular army. Upon completion of his full-time military service his military efficiency is kept at a high pitch by the weekly drills of the General SS. After leaving the Military SS he may enter the lower ranks of the police Gestapo or Party secret service SD. If he aspires to something higher he may enter anSS Junker School. Upon graduation he may become an officer of the Mili tary SS or Police or secure one of the many positions open to him in the State or Party. If he attends the university he will find anSSS House SS-Mannschaftshaus which will keep him in close touch with SS ideals. Should war break out ho will not serve with the ordinary armed forces but rather with a unit of the Military SS. Should he com mit any offense against military law ho would not be tried by an ordi nary court-martial but rather by a special SS court. His pension after the war will bo administered by a separate SS organization. Should ho fall on the battlefield the same SS organization will care for his  dependents.  Tlie influence of the SS and its mombors roaches out and touch es many phases of German life.' This influenco is increasing. The SS controls the police Gestapo and Party intelligence sorvico SD. It is dominant in the colonization and Gormanization of conquorod terri tories. A number of SS loaders hold key positions in the general ad ministration of German-occupied countries. The Gorman foreign service is assuming a. SS tint. Both Foreign Minister von Mbbentrop and tho German Ambassador in Paris Otto Abotz hold-high SS ranks. Ernst Bohlo hoad of the Foreign Organization of tho Party belongs to tho SS. SS members occupy influential positions in the press tho Reich Propaganda Ministry and in German education. Incidentally tho weekly   5S93, -47 -CONFIDENTIAL  newsreels are assembled under the direction of SS-Sturmbannfilhrer Dr. Hippier. The educational policy for German jrouth is to a considerable extent determined by S3 leaders. In certain sectors of German agri culture labor and finance thore is also an approciablo S3 influence.  SS-ObergruppenfUhrer Fritz Sauckol is Commissioner General for the Allocation of Labor. Baron Kurt von SchrHdor the Cologne financial and industrial magnate in whoso home the historic mooting botwoen Hitler and von Papen took place January 4 1933 is now an SS-   Oborftihror. SS-Brigadeftihrer Walter Granzow is Pposidont of the Ger man Renton Bank Deutsche Rontcnbank. The adjutant to the President  of the Gorman Reich Bank Reichsbsmk and Reich Minister of Economic Affairs is SS-StandartonfUhrer Dr. Apgust Schwedlor. The Chief of the Chancellory of the Fithrcr is an SS-Gruppenftthrer. Roichministor and Chief of the Reich Chancellery Lammors is an SS-Obergruppenx'Uhrer.  The' same high S3 rank is held by the Deputy of the Fdhror Martin Bormahn in whoso hands all the threads of the Party converge. In con nection with transportation difficulties of the Russian campaign Hitlei  appointed SS-StandartenfUhrcr Jakob Wcrlin Inspector General of Motor  Transport. Roichsstatthaltor and Senior District Presidents belonging to tho S3 now rule about a dozen important provinces of the Reich. S3 members constitute one third of tho Reich Defense Commissioners. Pen etration of S3 men into tho highest ranks of tho regular armed forces  however seems negligible.   2 S3 Ranks and Uniforms -The uniform of tho General S3 is entirely black except for a brown shirt. The cap has tho national insignia below which is tho distinguishing skull and cross-bones Totonkopf. A red armlet having a black swastika on a circular white ground is worn on the left arm. Below this is a band indicating what is believed to tho number of the S3 regiment Standurtc The insignia of rank appear on tho left lapel tho number on the right lapel is believed to indicate the number of tho S3 Company Sturm. The Military S3 has black uniforms similar to those of tho   5893, So Ranks  SS Unit  Die SS- char / or SS-Rotte  Die SS-Schar  German Army and U. S .army. SS Ranks and Corresponding Ranks in the Gorman Police  Corresponding SS Corresponding Units and Commanders  Commander German Army U.S. Army Unit Commander Unit Commander .SS-Mann Schtitze Private  Police A-itwSrter Oberschtltze Private  after 6 mcs. First service Class SS-Stiunffliiamn Gefreiter Lance  Police Unterwacht-Corporal meister SS-RottenfUhrer Die Gruppe Obergefreiter Squad Corporal ] Eailice Rott-   Der Trupp also Unter   wachtme.ister Offiziersanvfflrter  SS-Unterscharftlhrer Unteroffizier Sergeant   Police i 7achtmeister SS-Scharfilhrer  Police Oberwachtmeister . Unterfeldwebel SS-Oberscharftlhrer  Police Revier-Oberwachtmeister Zugv achtmeister Feldwebel SS-Hauptscharftlhrer  Police Hauptwachtmeister Oberfeldvrebel  Staff Sergeant  First Sergeant  Master Sergeant, SS Unit  Der SS-2 ug  Der SS-   Sturm Der SS- Sturmbann  Die SS- Standarte  Der SS- Abschnitt  Der SS-Ab-   Schnitt das Division General SS-Amt Generalleutnant leutnant General der Polizei   Continued German Army and U. S. Army. SS Ranks and Corresponding Ranks in the German Polioe  Corresponding SS Corresponding Jnits and Commanders  Commander Germany Amy U.S. Army. Unit Commander Unit Commander  SS-Sturmscharftlhrer Stabsfeld-Sergeant  Police Hauptwacht-webel Major meister SS-UntersturmfUhrer Der Leutnant Platoon Second  Lieutenant SS-Obersturmftlhrer Zug Oberleutnant First Lieutenant  SS-Hauptsturmflihrer Die Hauptmann Company Captain  Korapanie  SS-Sturmbannftihrer Das Major Battalion Major  SS-Obersturmbannftlhrer Bataillon Oberstleut-Lieutenant  nant Colonel  SS-Standartenflihrer Das Oberst Regiment Colonel  Regiment  SS-OberfUhrer Die General-Brigade Brigadier   Generalmajor der Brigade major General  Polizei  SS-Brigadefiihrer  Die General-Division Brigadier  Brigade General Die major Bureau Major    Generalmajor or   5293  SS-OberabSS- Gruppenftihrer Die General Division Major scfimitt das Generalleutnant Division leutnant or General SS-Hauptsjnt der Polizei Bureau, SS Unit  SS-Oberabschnitt. SS-Hauptamt- Chef d.Sicherheitspolizei  Chef der Ord' nurigspoilzei  Die-SS   The equation of the higher SS ranks to those of the army is highly problematical. o  o   Continued  German Army and U. S. Army SS Ranks and Corresponding Ranks in the German Police  Corresponding SS Correspondirig Units and Commanders  Commander Germany Army U. S. Army- Unit Commander Unit Commander  SS-Obergruppen-Das General Corps Lieutenant  fiihrer  Korps der  or  General der Waffen-SS  Infantcrie Department  General   General der Polizei  etc.  SS-Oberstgruppen-   Die  General-Army General  flihrer General-Armee oberst  oberst der Polizei  Reichsfllhrer-SS und Die General-Group Chef der Deutschen Heeres-feld-of Polizei gruppe ffiarshall Armies   5S93, -.51 -CONFIDENTIAL  General SS. However units serving with the army wear a field gray  uniform largely identical with the field service uniform of the army.  It is distinguishable from the latter by the position of the national  insignia which are worn on the left sleeve instead of on the right  breast. Below this a black band is usually worn with the name of the  unit e.g Lidolf Hitler Standarte. The SS insignia of rank gen  erally appear on the left side of the collar. Members of the SS-   Verftlgungstruppen wear the runic sign lj Lj' on the right side of the  collar. The same sign appears on the right side of the SS helmet as  well as on automobile license plates and other equipment. Members of  the SS Deathhead Division wear a'skull'and cross-bones on the'eright  side of the collar instead of the In addition the Military  SS have shoulder straps indicating rank as are worn by the regular  army. In contradistinction to the General SS the Military SS is  equipped with regulation side arms. The General SS wears the SS  dagger.  The nomenclature for ranks in the Military SS and General  SS is the same. But the holder of a rank in the General SS is not  entitled to equal rank in the Military SS. A lieutenant colonel of  the General SS was observed to be holding the rank of captain in the  Military SS a major of the General SS to be a first lieutenant of the  Military SS a captain a'master sergeant a second lieutenant a  sergeant.  In the first part of 1942 an unusually large number fifteen ' of prominent government officials was advanced to the high rank of  SS-Obcrgruppenfiihrer. About the same time the new rank of SS-Oberst   gruppenfilhrer was created and conferred on the Chief of the Order  Police as well as on the Party Treasurer.   o The Reich Leader of the SS -Reichsftlhrer-SS - Heinrich Himmler became Reich Leader of the SS January 6 1929. During the fourteen years of his leadership the SS developed from a group of 270 men into an organization numbering hundreds of thousands.  5S93, -52 CONFIDENTIAL  Himmler is the only individual in -whose person all the lines of SS influonoe converge. Thus ho is Chief of the German. Police Reich Commissar for the Strengthening of German Folkdom -Deputy of the Plenipotentiary for Administration Reiph Leader of the Party Member of the Reichstag and Prussian State Councillor. See chart L Himm ler s position as Reichsfiihrer-SS is particularly important since he is responsible only to Hitler. No resort to intermediaries is needed to gain direct access to the Fiihrer.  Himmler comes from an educated. Bavarian Catholic upper middle-class family. He served 1S17-18 as an officer candidate in the Eleventh Bavarian Infantry Regiment. Ho graduated after the war from the agricultural section of the Munich Technical College. He took active part in the Hitler Putsch of 1923 and was at one time a protdgd of Gregor Strassor the organizing genius of the Party who sub sequcntly became estranged.  Himmler exerts his influence largely through two sets of agenciest 1 the Central Offices HauptHmter of the Police and SS   2 through his personal representatives in the Corps Areas and German-occupied countries viz. the Higher Loaders of the SS and Police. His immediate assistants are a Chief Adjutant and a Police Adjutant.  4 The Reich Command of the SS -Reichsftlhrung-SS - The executive apex of the SS organization is the SS Reich Leader and the Main Office of his personal staff. This constitutos the Supreme Command of the entire SS. Under the Supreme Command below c-4-a of the entire SS are the High Command offices of the main branches of the SSs l the High Command of the.General SS below c-4-f 2 the High Command of the Military SS below c-4-g 3 the High Command of the Security Service SD of the SS Reich Loader above b-3-o . The High Command for matters concerning race and settlement is the Main Office for Race and Settlement. below c-4-h . The offices of the SS Reich Command are located in Berlin   5393, -53 CONFIDENTIflL  unless otherwise stated.   a The Main Office for the Personal Staff of the Reich Leader of the SS -Hauptamt PorsBnlicher Stab des Reichs- f lhrers-SS -evolved from the adjutancy of the SS Reich Leader. This is now the central supreme command office for the entire.SS die oberste und zentralo Bofehlsstello der gesamten SS. It is also a  catch all for affairs of the Reichsfiihror which do not come under the jurisdiction of some other Hauptamt. The Chief of the Personal Staff of the SS Reich Leader is SS-Obergruppenfiihrer Karl YJolff the same ago as Himmler born 1900 a graduate of a junior college Gymnasium infantry lieutenant in the YTorld War and former proprietor of an advertising agency.  The Main Office of the Personal Staff includes the follow ing subsections  1. T Frossestello RF 2. The Culture Referat -das Kulturreferat -has charge of the SS Porcelain Factory at Allach near Munich. It is a pet project of Himmler and produces new-stylo SS porcelain. 3. The Department of Cultural Research - Abteilung ftlr kulturelle Forschung -supervises SS excavations to unearth prehistoric relics supervises the publication of the results and takes care of the excavation sites.. It aims to correct the  biased Greek Roman and clerical accounts of early German history. 4. The Study Society of The Ancestral Heritage. -Studiengosollschaft Das Ahnonerbo. 5. The Department of Economic Aid -Ab teilung Wirtschaftliche Ililfo -handles questions connected with the liquidation of pre-1933 debts. 6. T Vorein Lcbonsborn -is composed primarily of SS members. In its Mothers Homos it provides medical care at childbirth as well as pre 5893, -54 CONFIDENTIAL and postnatal rest cures. It also accepts for discreet treatment premarital and extramarital confinement cases of racially sound mothers. Its homes are located in SteinhBring Polzin Klosterheido  Mark Hohehorst near Bremen Wernigerode Pernitz-Muggendorf  Lower Danube.  7. The Administration of the Houses pro vided for SS Members attending colleges and universities -SS- MannschaftsMuser. 8. The Bureau for the Four Year Plan - Dienststelle Vierjahresplan -handles the tasks assigned to the SS. Those concern organizing and insuring the allocation of Labor in the Four Year Plan. Recently the SS gained indirect control over this whole field when SS-ObergruppenfUhrer Fritz Sauckel was appointed Commissioner General for the Allocation of Labor in the Four Year Plan. 9. The Chief of the Protocol -Chef des Protokolls. 10. Ministries and Party Bureaux.  b The Main Office for S Personnel -SS- Porsonalhauptamt -handles all personnel questions of the officers corps for the entire SS. Its subdivisions 1. Office for the Personnel Records of SS Leaders -Amt fiir Ftihrerpersonalien. See below c'-4-f-3. 2. Office for Prospective SS Leaders - Amt fdr Ftihrernachwuchs. 3. Office of raining and Education - Amt Erziohung und Bjidung. 4. The Inspector of SS Junker Schools - Inspekteur der SS-Junkerschulon -is also responsible for the further education and training of Junkor School graduates. Besides the Junke Schools at Braunschweig and T8lz the Leadership School Filhrerschule  5893, CONFIDENTIAL  -35  of the General S3 at Munioh-Dachau is under his control.   c The Main Office of the S3 Court -Hauptamt SS-Gericht. -is located in Starnberg-Munich. The S3 Court is directl responsible to the S3 Reich Leader. It deals with matters which come within the jurisdiction of a disciplinary court and a court of honor. It handles appeals for leniency both those concerning disciplinary measures as well as those pertaining to criminal law. For the duration of the war special S3 courts for criminal offenses have been established for the following categories of S3 and Polices full-time hauptberuflich members of the Roich Command of the S3 members of the SS-Vorfttguugstruppe and the S3 Deathhead Formations VerbSnde members of the S3 Junker Schools full-time members of the ' ffs of Higher 33 and Police Leaders who command the aforesaid formations VerbHndc all formations VerbSndo of the Order Police the entire Security Police and all full-timo hauptberuflich members of the Security Service. These special S3 courts supplant courts-martial assume their functions and apply their laws and procedures. Special mixed S3 and police courts sit in cases in volving members of the police. Such a mixed S3 and police court exists in Norway S3 und Polizeigericht Nord .  In August 1942 after the death of SS-Obergruppenfiihrer Paul  Scharfo at the age of sixty-six Scharfe was succeeded as Qhief of  the SS Court by Lieutenant General of the Military S3 Franz Broithaupr  The Main Office of the S3 Court has the following subdi visions  1 O Disziplinaramt.  2. Office for Law -Rechtsamt. 3. Liaison Office--Verbindungsamt. -This maintains liaison with other offices of the Party and Roich which havt related interests.  d 1 he Main Offico for S3 Administration and ism, -56  CONFIDENTIAL  Economic Matters - SS- Vor'waltungs-i.ind Wirtschaftshauptamt -handles budgo.tary and salary matters as well as all other oconomic matters. Its subdivisions  1. Office of the Budget -Amt Haushalt. 2. Office of Buildings -Amt Bauton. Both 1. and 2. are identical with the Main Office of Budget and Build ings in the Reich Ministry of Interior. See charts 2 and 3. 3. Office of Economic Undertakings -Amt Wirtschaftsunternehmungcn.  e Administrative Chief of the Guard Echelons of the National Socialist Party and Reich Treasurer of the SS - Verwaltungschof der Schut staffeln der NJLEAP. und Roichskassenverwaltc der SS. The finances of the SS come essentially from throe sources  l the Reich Minister of Finance who subsidizes the SS-Verftigungstruppe the SS Junker Schools the SS Deathhead Formations and the Concontration Gamp Headquarters Kommandanturen 2 SS membership dues 3 the proceeds from collections and similar activities of the SS. The use of Reich funds by military formations of the Party is not audited by the Reich after these funds pass into the hands of tho Party treasurer. The funds of the SS military formations are then trans ferred by him to the administrative Chief of the Guard Echelons who is a Ministerial Director in the Reich Ministry of Interior. To main tain unity in tho financial administration of the SS the iidministra- Echelons five Chief of tho Guard/is also Reich Troasurer of the SS and as such administers also the proceeds from sources 2 and 3 . The administrative offices within the various SS Main Offices see below f and h are coordinated with one another and sub ordinated to the Administrative Chief of the Guard Echelons.  f Tho Main Office of the SS -SS-Hauptamt -is tho High Command office oborsto Bofohlsstelle of the SS Reich Leader for tho General SS and tho barracked part of the SS. Tho Command Office -'-see below g -which Ras since boon created is believed to   893, -57 - CONFIDENTIAL  bB rosponsiblo now for the barracked SS.  The Chief of the SS Main Office since 1935 has been SS- Oborgrupponftlhror August Heissmeyer. Heissmeyer fought in the World War as infantryman and aviator. Ho has university training in law and political economy as'well as experience as a minor and technician in a dyo factory. In 1940 at the ago of forty-three he married Gertrud Scholz-Klink Reich Women Loader and head of a number of Nattional Socialist women's organizations. In his position as In spector of the twenty-two National Political secondary schools Napola. Heissmeyer has transformed those into centers for the propagation of SS ideas. Recently Berger has been montioned as Chief of the SS- Hauptant while Heissmeycr is said to be Loiter of the tunt Hoissmeycr  The subdivisions of the SS Main Offices  1. The Central Chancery -Zentralkanzlei  Zk. -is the command office Bofehlsstollo of the Chief of the SS Main Office. It is a coordinating and supervisory agency for the other subdivisions.  Leadership Office -Filhrungsant l exorcises  some functions'of a general staff for the General SS. It has charge of training organization assemblages- of General SS units.  3. The Personnel Office -Personalamt II handles personnel questions of all SS officers of-the General SS from' the rank of second lieutenant to captain. See.above c-4-b-l . 4. Liaison Officer with tho SS Court - VerbindungsfUhror zum SS-Guricht ill. Soe above c-4-c-3.  5. The.Administration Office -Verwaltungsam   IV -handles the administration of the-SS Main Office. It is co ordinated with other administration offices and subordinated to tho Administrative Chief of the SS. - See above c-4-o. 6. Office for Medical and Health Services - Sahittttsamt V. Tho different SS medical and health units are sub ordinate to this office.  5293, -58 -CONFIDENTIAL  Each unit of tho Military S3 has attached to it an S3 durgeon and S3 dentist. Active S3 surgeons and S3 dentists of the future will receive preliminary S3 military training and then ob tain their professional training at the. S3 Medical Academy in Graz. The S3 dentists and presumably S3 surgeons are also ordered to periodic refresher courses.  Dental and presumably medical care is extended to S3 families. Similar arrangements are believed to oxistsfor tho General S3. Many police surgeons are also S3 surgeons. Rocently the S3 dental care has been intensified.   Practically all tho services of the military sanitation in the Gorman Army are said to be directed by 33 members. In tho winter of 1941/42 tho lack of experienced German surgeons brought about a rise in tho number of deaths from relatively slight wounds. Tho cases of oxanthematic typhus septicemia and other infections increased.  General Dr. Wolff at the beginning of the winter 1941/42 published an item placing the responsibility for inadequate medical and sanitary preparations on Dr. L Conti. Dr. Conti is an S3 Major General Med. -SS-Generalarzt -and chief of the German physicians ReichsgesundhoitsfUhrer. General Wolff advocated more practical instruction for German physicians by omission of ideologic courses and immediate -rehabilitation of Jewish physicians for mili tary sanitation service. With' tho support of higher authorities Dr. Conti secured the refusal of General Wolffs first request. The second request resulted in. a compromiset Jewish physicians wore allowed to serve as auxiliary physicians in civil hospitals. In re prisal tho military commander mobilized all physicians up to the age of 60. See below c-4-j.  7. The Induction Office -Erfassungsamt VI -is charged with the admittance of probationary and full members of the S3. It regulates transfers releases and readmission of S3 en 5893, CONFIDENTI iL   -59   listed men and noncommissioned officers. It maintains card cata logues with the personal record of all S3 members. IN addition it computes the total strength of the S3.   8. The Office for Security Tasks -A-mt ftir Sicherungsaufgaben VTI. -plans the large-scale employment of SS units on special occasions such as the presence of the Filhrer in public gatherings. It makes plans-for the mobilization of the SS. These are worked out in collaboration with the High Command of the Armed Forces. It mobilizes reinforcements for the maneuvers of the S3 Deathhead Regiments. In addition it handles questions connected with the obligatory military service of S3 members.  9. ErgRnzungsamt dor Uaffon-SS VIII. - This office has probably been transferred to the Command Office of the Military S3. Soe below c-4-g. The regional recruiting system seems to coincide with the S3 Main Sections SS-Oberabschnitto which in turn are geographical identical with the Corps Areas Wehrkreise. 10. The Procurement Office -Beschaffungsamt -procures equipment for the entire S3. 11. Office of Physical Training -Amt fltr Leibesdbungen. 12. Nachrichtenverbindungen XI. IS. Administrative -Office for Veterans and Veterans' Dependents -Versorgungs-und Fdrsorgenmt. XII -Veterans receive preferential treatment. Soe below c-4-h-4.  ' 14. The Office of Education and Indoctri nation -Schulungsamt XIIl -is particularly concerned with in doctrination. Recently however the S3 Main Office made arrangemontr with the German Association-for People1s Education Deutsches Volksbildungswcrk whereby the Military S3 is to receive popularized in struction in general and cultural subjects.   5893, 60 CONFIDENTIAL  The Leader of the SS-Schulungsamt is also Inspector for tho indoctrination weltanschauliche Erziohung of tho Order Polico  The following Inspectorates and Inspectors are subordinate to the Chief of tho S3 Main Office. A more recent list omits 18 19 20 and adds 15  15. Inspector of Motor Transport -Inspektour des Kraftfahrwesons. 16. Inspector of the S3 Cavalry -Inspekteur dor SS-Reiterei. 17. Inspekteur der SS-Reitschulon. 18. Inspectorate of the SS-Verfdgungstruppen -Inspektion der SS-Verfugungstruppen. 19. The Leader of the S3 Deathhead Regiments amd Concentration Camps -Dor Fiihror dor SS-Totenkopfstandarten und K.L. 20. Inspectorate of the S3 Frontier and Guard Units -Inspoktion der SS-Gronz-und Wachoinheiten. The following institutions are subordinate to tho Chief of the S3 Main Office a.nd tho related Offices and Inspectorates  21. Welfare Camp at Schlcisshoim. near Munich -Hilfswerklagor Sohleisshoim. 22. Trade-School of the SS-Verfilgungstruppen at St. Georgon -SS-VT.-Berufsschule St. Goorgen. 23. The S3 Training Camp at Dachau near t -..'' Munich -SS-Ubungslager Dachau.  24. The S3 Convalescent Home at Sasbachwalden SS-Erholungshoim Sasbachwalden 25. The S3 Motor 'Transport School at Bcrno in Oldenburg -SS-Kraftfahrschule Berne. In 1942 there was also anSS Motor Transport School SS-Kraftfahrschule at Vienna-Sch8nbrunn.  5893, -61 CONFIDENTIAL  26. The Main Riding Academy of the SS at -Munich -SS-Hauptreitschule Mthchen. 27. The S3 Remount Institute at Hamburg -SS- Remonte Anstalt Haiaburg.  Command Office of the Military S3 -Kommandoai. der Waffen-SS. In 1939 the administration centers for the two branches of the militarized S3 were l Chief of the Administration of the 33-   Verfdgungstruppen Leiter der Truppenverwaltung der SS-Verfflgungstftupipen at Berlin-Wilmersdorf Kaiserallee 188 and 2 Chief of the Ad ministration of the S3 Deathhead Formations Leiter der Truppenver waltung der SS-Totenlcopfverbjinde in Oranienburg. Early in 1941 the former office for administration of the SS-Verfilgungstruppen at Berlin- Wilmsrsdorf Kaiserallee 188 appears with a new designation as Main Office of the S3 Command SS-Ftihrungshauptarat . Late in 1941 the Command Office of the Military S3 Kommandoamt der Tfaffen-SS can be identified. There is good reason for assuming that most functions pertaining to the Military S3 are now concentrated in the new Command Office. The organization of the Comraand Office seems to be quite complex consisting of at least six Main Offices HauptSmter which are presumably subdivided into Offices Anter Main Office VI which has been identified is concerned with the education indoc trination and the care of S3 troops Schulung und Trupponbetrenung . Also identified is the Office.for.Medical and Health Services SanitSts amt.  The Chief of the Command Office of the Military S3 is 33- GruppenfUhrer Max Jttttncr. Significantly jUttner is one of the few S3 officers known'to have served as a general staff officer in the World War. Ho became -an active officer of the field artillery in 1907 and in 1918 was general staff officer of the 119th Infantry Division Until 1933 he belonged to the conservative Stahlholm. In 1940 Jilttnor was SA.-OborgruppenfUhrer and Chief of tho Command Office   Fdhrungsamt in tho SA. High Command. Should he still retain this   5S93, 62  CONFIDENTIAL  position the uso of the SA. as an auxiliary of tho SS would bo facili tated.   h Tho Main Offico for RaoB and Sottlemont Rasse- und Siodlungshauptarat -handles all matters concerning family and ancestry of S3 members and seeks to rejuvenate German farming by tho settlement of selected SS families. Tho Chief of this office for many years was the Reich Min ister of Agriculture Darr&. Herbert Backe his successor as Reich Minister is also a member of tho SS Himmler himself is by training and inclination strongly interested in agriculture. When appointed Reich Commissar for the Strengthening of German Folkdom following the conquest of Poland Himmler leaned heavily on the S3 for tho execution of his resettlement program.  The Volksdeutsche Mittelstolle VM. under SS-Obergrupponftthrer Werner Lorenz had previously collected material on racial Germans abroad. The Central Office for Emigrants Einwandererzentralstclle or EWZ was then created as an adjunct to tho hief of the Security Police and Security Service An SS Colonizing taff   SS-Ansiedlungsstab at Litzmannstadt together with a Resettlement  Command Umsiedlungskommnndo now operate in the field. Six hundred  and thirty SS students are said to be attached to these latter forma  tions summer 1941.  Between 500 000 and 600 000 racial Germans from Southern Tyrol Lithuania Esthonia Latvia Volhynia Galicia the Narew Area the Government General Bessarabia the Bukovina and the Dobruja have been resettled in Roich-controllod areas. 'Also assist ing in these operations are the SS medical and health service the SS Main Sections c-6-c-2 Alpenland Northwest Baltic Fulda-Worra South Southeast and SS Main 0ffi.ee c-4-f the Vienna National Political School and the SS Riding School at Hamburg. Aside from tho SS the National Socialist Folk Welfare units the SA. and modical units of tho Armed Forces collaborated with Reich Commissar Himmler.   5893, -63 CONFIDENTIAL Members of the Reich Commissar's staff and SS Main Office for Race and Settlement maintain close relations with the Reich Office for Space Organization Reichstelle filr Raumordnung. The latter is said to have prepared the geopolitical plans for the par tition of Poland in October 1939.  Lhe subdivisions of the SS Main Office for Race and Settle ment follows  1. Administration Office -Verwaltungsamt. This is coordinated with other SS administration offices and sub ordinated to the Administrative Chief of the SS. See abovo c-4-e. Zj The Office of Family and Blood Rela tionships -Sippenamt -handles the petitions of SS members -who in tend to marry. Both parties submit to a medical examination and bring evidence of sound heredity and Aryan origin. Witnesses attest the political reliability and good character of the prospective bride. The resort of last appeal is the SS Reich Leader. The independent units of the SS maintain Genealogical Offices Sipponpflegestollen to aid the individual SS members in collecting data.  3. -ho Office for Racial Matters - Rassenamt -seeks to maintain uniform standards in the racial en trance examinations. It also trains the racial specialists Reforenter with the SS units. ' 'Be Settlement Office -Siedlungsamt is in charge of establishing selected SS families in suburban SS colonies and on farms.  Arrangements between the SS and Hitler Youth exist whereby the Fo.rm Service of tho Hitler Youth Landdienst dor HJ. is to be come a reservoir from which men will be recruited for tho Military and General SS. Former members of tho Farm Service who complete their period of enlistment in the Military SS 4 or 12 years are eligible for settlement on new farms as these become available. The Defence Farmers Wohrbauorn will be established preferably in stra    5393,  65 -CONFIDENTIAL  representatives of the SS Reich Leader and Chief of the German Po lice. They are his commissioners for police and SS tasks as well as other duties assigned to thorn. Thus SS Reich Leader Himmler made the Higher'' Loaders at KHnigsborg Danzig Posen and Breslau his commissioners in executing his duties as Reich Commissar for Strongibhoning German Folkdom.  The forces at the command of ehoh of the Higher SS and Police Loader are l The General SS of the Corps Area -which is organized as an SS Main Section SS-Oberabschnitt. The Higher Leader has permanent command of this unit. 2 The Order Police Security Police and Security Service which the Higher Leader commands in certain contingencies. o The Military SS commanded by the Higher Leader in time of peace. Provisions are believed to have been made to organize one division of General SS and one division of Military SS in each Corps. Area.  The Higher.Loader1s staff is composed of l the Staff Leader of the GSMain setion in tho Corps Area 2 the Inspector of the Security Police and Security Service within the Corps Area and   3 tho Inspector of the Order Police usually with the rank of brovot major general of the police char. Genoralmajor dor Polizei. In tho Government General the Higher SS and Police Loader has a Commander Befohlshaber of the Ordor Police and a Commander of the Security Police attachod'to his staff. Those seem analogous to the Inspectors mentioned abovo. In addition the Higher Loader com mands the Sclbstschutz formations of racial Germans. The staff of Higher SS and Police Leaders in othei ccupied aroas is believed to follow this same pattern with appropriate Modifications. See dia grams b-3-b.  6 Tho General SS -die Allgcmeinc SS - a General -Tho General SS is the continuation of tho original SS organization. Its mission is substantially that of the entire SS as described above under 1. General ObservationsTho special mission of tho General  5093 . ., -66 CONFIDENTIAL  S3 is to maintain liaison with professional S3 units in the police  the Military S3 and Security Service Thoso must not be allowed  to go astray from Party ideology as a result of narrow professional  specialization. An additional special mission is to give pre-mili tary training to thosw who still lack military training and post military refresher courses to thoso who have already had military training.  The bulk of the members of the General S3 is engaged in other occupations. Many members hold key positions in the State Party and private economic life. It is this far-flung dispersion of the General S3 throughout the population which constitutes a particular element of 33 strength and keeps the S3 leaders in touch with the pulse of-the nation.   b Strength Statistics of the General S3 1. Total Strengths 200 000 in 1936. This figure apparently includes thp General S3 Military S3 and other S3 Formations. Sources S3 Reich Leader Himmler. 240 000 in 1939. This figure is specifically stated as that of the General S3 only. Sources Gunter d'Alquen editor of Das .Schwarzo Korps. 200 000 to 300 000 on November 1 1939. This estimate is believed to include all S3 formations. Sources M.I.D.  240 000 early part of 1940 This figure is specifically stated as applying only to the General S3. Sources Herbert Grau head of the S3 Reich Loader's Press Bureau  The strength of presumably all S3 formations is placed  July 1942 by a Swedish newspaper at 750 000.   2 The Active' Strength of the General S3 is made up of the full-time paid staffs of the S3 Main Sections S3 Sections and S3 Regiments. At the beginning of 1941 there are be lieved to have been 20 S3 Main Sections 43 S3 Sections 124 S3   5893,  67 CONFIDENTIAL  Foot Rogimonts 20 Mounted Reginents 14 Signal Corps Battalions 14 Combat Engineers Battalions. The staff strength of each of those various units is unknown. However the total strength of all staffs may be 2 000 to 10 000. Many former members of these staffs are now with the armed forces and have been replaced by older men.  3. Strength of the Trained Reserve of the General SS -All General SS members .have received at least the rudiments of military training See below c-6-i. There are three main groups of SS reserves  a. The il'active General SS -aktive Allgemeine SS -comprising men usually between 18 and 35. This group is not active in the military-sense of full-time service. It receives military training in addition to that already obtained in the armed forces in its free time and presumably at summer encamp ments The first five years of training are intensive. After the ago of 25 .the training relaxes somewhat to permit more time for family obligations. b. -The SS Reserve-- SS Reserve -com prises the. men from 35 to 45 and corresponds to the Landwehr of the Goman Army. It is drawn from active SS mombors who 'at 35 apply for admittance. c. The SS Cadre Section -SS- Staramabteilung -comprises men from the SS Reserve who at the ageof 45 apply for admittance. It corresponds to tho Landsturm of the Germany Army. Insufficient data forbid an itemized estimate of strength for a b and c.  At the end of 1941 it was estimated by one source that only half of the General SS had boon absorbed into the armod forces. Making allowances for subsequent increases in General SS strength for men lost to tho armed forces and for indispensable SS members in key positions it seems that tho effective strength of the General SS   5393, -68 CONFIDENTIAL  which could ho mobilized immodiatoly lies between 100 000 and 200 000 men. This group while comprising many'older men would contain a  considerable number from tho active General S3.  4. Untrained Reserve -Strictly speaking there is no untrained reserve' of thd General S3 but rather a reserve with various degrees of military training. 5. The' Police and Constabulary -must bo considered as a well-trained well-equipped auxiliary of the 33. Identical leadership in the higher central and regional executive offices of tho S3 and police should Insure prompt and close collabo ration. 6. The SA. and Other Somimilitary Organi zations -are less closely integrated with the S3 than the police. Yet in certain contingencies they would collaborate with the S3.  See above c-4-g.  c Organization of the Ganeral S3 1. Reich High Command of tho General S3 - The Reich Commander of the General S3 is S3 Reich LoaderHimmler. Tho High Command Office is the Main' Office of the S3 SS-Hauptarnt.  See above c-4-f. 2V The S3 Main Sections -SS-Oborabschnitte -are tho largest regional units of tho General S3.. Their territory coincides with that of military Corps Areas' Wehrkreiso. They are designated according to their geographical location e. g . Northeast Baltic etc. The hoadquartofs of an S3 Main Section is situated often in tho headquarter's city of the Corps Area.  The Commander of an S3 Main Soction Ftthror des SS-Oberabdehnitts ranks usually as SS-ObergrupponfUhrer or SS-Gruppenftthrcr.  6  Eventually it seems that all S3 Main Sections will be commanded by the Higher Leaders of tho S3 and Police. This is the case already in S3 Main Sections Northeast Spree Rhine Danube Vistuld and perhaps other Main Sections. Sepp Dietrich Commander of the S3 Main Section   5893, 69 CONFIDENTIAL  Spree which includes Berlin is also General of the Military SS. The Commander of an SS Main Section is assisted by a staff.  SS Main Sections in first part of 1941  SS Main Section Headquarters Corps  SS-Oberabschnitt Aroa  Northeast Kftnigsberg/Pr. i Baltic Stettin ii Spree Berlin-Steglitz in Elbe Dresden IV Southwest Stuttgart V West Diisseldorf VI South Munich VII Southeast Breslau VIII Arolsen-Waldeck   Fulda-Werra IX  near Kass-el North Sea Hamburg X Center Braunschweig XI Rhine Wiesbaden XII Main Ntlrnberg XIII Danube Vienna XVII 'Alpenland Salzburg XVIII Vistula Danzig xx Wartho Posen XXI  New SS Main Sections Identified First In 1941.   Lorraine/Saar- Palatinato SaarbrUcken  Northwest The Hague 1  North Oslo l   5693, -70-CONFIDENTIAL Tho strength of an S3 Main Section is boliovcd to bo roughly oquivalont to that of a division. The S3 Main Section is divided geographically into SS Sections each of whoso strength approximates a brigade.  All tho SS Mounted Ro iments SS-Reiterstandarten and SS .Signal Corps Battalions SS-Nachrichton-Sturmbannc of an SS Main Section are under direct command of Main Section headquarters. Thus on an average there aro one or two SS Mounted Regiments and one SS Signal Corps Battalion attached to the SS Main Section headquarters.  Typical Organization of ah SS-Main Section  NB. Tho organization of Sections I and III the same as Section II of Regiment 1 and 3 the same as Regiment 2 of Battalion 1 and 3 tho  same as Battalion 2.   5893, CONFIDENTIAL  -71  3. S3 Sections -SS-Abschnitte -are or ganized geographically within an SS Main Section.  SS Brigades or Sections at the boginning of 1941  Corps Headquarters SS Area Section  Abschnitt Number  I KBnigsborg VII I A11enstein/Pr. XXII  II Stottin XIII  II Schwerin XXXIII  III Berlin-Steglitz III III Frankfurt Odor . Xu III Berlin-Steglitz XXIII  IV Chemnitz II IV Hallo Saalo XVIII IV Roichonberg XXXVII  V Stuttgart X V Karlsruhe -XIX V Konstanz XXIX  VI Esson V VI Mtttistor -XVII VI Dortmund . xxv  VII . Mttnchen Munich I VII Augsburg . XXXII VIII Breslau VI VIII Hirschberg Ricsongeb. XXI VIII ' ' Oppcln xxrv  IX Woimah XXVII  IX Kassel XXX  X Bremon-Horn XIV X Altona-Elbo XV X Kiel XX  XX Hannover Hanover 'iv XI Dossau XVI  XII Koblonz a.Rh. XI  XII Neustadt a.d.W. XXXIV  XIII Wdrzburg IX XIII Bayrouth XXVIII XIII Karlsbad XXXVIII  XVII Linz VIII  XVII . Wieh Vienna XXXI' xvm Graz ' fc&v XVIII Innsbruck XXXVI  XX Danzig XXVI XXI Gaosen XXXXII XXI Litzmannstadt Lodz XXXXIII  Sections XXXK end XXXXI have not been identified.  . . .. ..  Prag Prague XXXIX  . ..   5893, 72 -CONFIDENTIAL  The Commander of an S3 Section Fflhrcr des SS-Abschnitts rariKs 'usually as SS-Oberftihror or SS-Brigadeftihror. Ho-is assisted by a staff. An S3 Section roughly equivalent to a brigade usually con sists of two or throe S3 regiments which are geographically separated Under direct command of S3 Soction headquarters are all the S3 Com    baf'Engineer Battalions SS-Pioni.or-Sturmbanne the. S3 Motorized Companies SS-Kraftfahr-Stiirmo and S3 Medical Companies SS SanitHts-Stilrme of the Section. There are believed to bo on an average one battalion of SS.Comba.t Engineers seven or eight 33 Motorized qmpan.ios ' and at least one 33 'Medical Company attached to each S3 Section.  4. S3 Regiments -S3 Standarten which compose an S3 Section arc usually stationed indifferent localities within an S3 Section. Early in 1941 there were at least 124 S3 Foot Regiments. At the. beginning-of 1940 there''were 20 S3 Mounted Regi ments SS-Keiterstandarten. They are numberod with Arabic numerals e.g. .SoStandarte- Foot Ragt. or' R. 8 Eight Mounted Regt. In addition the S3 Regiment often has a name e.g. 1. Stand. carl La-force . ' ' incomplete'list of S3 Regiments Appendix Part 6. An S3 Regiment SS-Standarte is commanded by an 33Standca. rtenfffiiiper. Its normal strength is three battalions Sturmbannev .'.. . 5. S3 Battalions -SS-Sturmbanno -are commanded usually by an SS-Sturmhannftthror major or SS-Obersturmbannftthror  lieutenant colonel. The normal strength is four S3 Companies S.S-Stdrme. .  The numbers of the Signal Corps Battalions SS-Nachrichtonsturmbanne and Combat Engineer Battalions SS-Pionier Sturmbanne run consecutively for the entire Reich. They are designated N 8 or Na 8 for Eight S3 Signal Corps Bn.j Pi. St. 7 or Pi. 7 for Seventh S3 Combat Engineers Bn.   5893, -73 CONFIDENTIAL   6 S3 Companies -SS-Sttimo -are com manded normally by an SS-Hauptsturmftthrer captain and are sub divided into Ztlgo. platoons and Scharen squads The companios of a SS Regiment are numbered . Thus SS-Mann 12/54 belongs to the Twelfth Company of the 54th SS Regiment  SS Motorized Companies appear to be numbered consecutively for the entire Reich. SS Motorized Company 514 SS-Kraftfahrsturm is abbreviated K 314.   d Personnel of the General SS -Younger per sonnel is drawn almost exclusively from the Hitler Youth. At the age of eighteen the SS candidate SS-Boworbcr from the Hitler Youth is accepted as a probationary member SS-Ajxwiirter. On bomplotion of his labor and military service he submits to intensive ideological indoctrination and receives instruction concerning the SS code of honor and SS marriage regulations. The following November 9th lie swears that ho and his family and posterity Sippo will adhere to the principles of the SS. He is noiv a full member of the SS and may wear the SS dagger. He is also bound by the SS code of honor. A number of older SS members comes from the SA. High SS rank appears to bo conferred on individuals prominent in public life. The aristocracy the upper middle classes and men with university training are strongly represented.  A part of the officers and noncommissioned officers of the General SS comes from the men who have served in the militarized SS- Vcrfilgungstruppo  'Physical requirements for entry into the SS are high. SS members even older members must also maintain certain standards of physical fitness. See below c-6-i.  The exact age-structure of SS personnel is not known. How ever the SS numbered 52 000 in 1933. The youngest man in this group is now 1942 about 28. Assuming that an influx of older men has com pensated for diminution of the original 52 000 through death and other   5393, -74 -COITFIDENIL'Jj  causes it can be assumed that at least'one-fifth to ono-sixth of   tho1 Gdhoral SS belongs to tho ago-group above 28. For thn offices of the S3 Roich Command Virhich deal with per sonnel questions see above c-4-b c-4-f-3 c-4-f-7.   e Finances of the General SS -The principal sources of income for tho General SS according to semioffical sources are SS membership dues the proceeds from collections and similar activities. Tho income from collections is admittedly largo. Tho staffs of the SS Main Sections -SS Sections and SS Regiments are full-time paid employees. However they receive assis tance from unpaid honorary SS workers. Presumably the rates of pay for full-timo SS members are at least equivalent to the pay-scales of tho Gorman Government for similar work.' See above c-4-e.   f ' mation is available on this subject. However the fact that in 1939 there wore only 36 SS Motorized Companies while now 1940-41 tho 314th SS Motorized Company has boon identified seems to indicate a great increase in motorized equipment for the General SS. SS equip ment is believed identical with that of tho Gorman armed forces and to come from the same sources. The Procurement Office see hbove c-4-f-10 of the-SS Main Office secures all SS equipment.   g Mobilization System -Orders for a general mobilization of the General SS can be given by tho Filhrer tho Roich Loader of tho SS end possibly by others. Regional mobilization of tho General SS within a Corps urea i.o. an SS Main Soctionj can be ordered.by the regional Higher Leader of the SS and Police. Spo above c-5. Tho. Main Office of the SS c-4-f is particularly charged with mobilization tasks especially its subdivisions tho Leadership Office 2 tho Induction Office 7 and the Office for Security Tasks 8. The Office for Security Tasks works out mobilization plans in collaboration With tho High Command of tho Armed Forces.   5G93, -75-COEFIDENTL'iL -Mobilization is greatly facilitatod by. the oxistcnco of active full-time paid staffs of the SS.Main Soctions Sootions and Regiments.in well over a hundred localities throughout the Roich.   h Strategic and Tactical Doctrines -The Strategic and tactical doctrines of the SS are believed to parallel the' doctrines-current' in the Gorrlan Armed Forces. Much -'stress is placed on the offensive.-The aggressive spirit of the SS surpasses that of the regular Gorman army and at times borders on rashness. Certain Military SS and SS Police units have revealed a lack cohesion in attacking. Advance units failed to maintain communications with rearward units and wore at times in danger of. encirclement. Sub ordinate-SS commanders display oven greater independence than is usual in the regular armed forces and are -known to attack on their own initiative.  i Training Moralo .and Efficiency -Most younger SS men have received six months of semi-military training in the Labor Service and two years training in the German Armed Forces.  Many older mombers saw service in the First World War.  Attached to the various regiments of the General SS are Training Companies Ausbildungsstttmo It is hot. known whether these companies exist merely for those SS members without initial military training. However it is certain that all SS members-receive a vigorous course' of instruction until the ago of 25. This is obtained at the weekly drills and at summer encampments.  SS members are expected to acquire the Reich Sport Insignia and the SA.-Defence Insignia.  The Aoich Sport insignia may'be obtained by passing one ex amination in each of the following five categories l swimming over 300 meters 2 high-jumping or broad-jumping ski-jumping agility in the use of the vaulting-horse 3 running -100 400 or 1500 meters   4 throwing the discus-and javelin shot-and rock-put agility with parallel bars and the horizontal'bar swimming skating rowing  5893, -76 CONFIDENTIAL  paddling weight-lifting gliding shooting 5 walking Laufen over 10 000 meters or endurance-march swimming skating skiing cycling rowing paddling riding cross-country run with the motor cycle.  The exercises to meet the requirements of the SA. Defence Insignia fall into three main groups. l Physical exercises 100 meter dash broad-jump shot-put club-throwing whihh simulates the use of German hand-grenades equipped with a handle 3 000 meter run.   2 Basic exercises 25 kilometer march with full equipment shooting with small caliber arms throwing clubs hand-grenades at a target and other exercises not mentioned. o ierrain Sport GelSndesport analysis and utilization of terrain camouflage estimating distance etc. These exercises must be repoated yearly. After acquiring the Reich Sport Insignia and the SA. Defence Insignia the SS man may try for the SS Achievement Insignia SS- Leistungsabzeichen. Its requirements are unknown but apparently more rigorous.  Indoctrination proceeds apace with physical and military  training. Disloyalty is an unpardonable offence in the SS code of h  honor he SS owes its rapid rise more to its relatively unblemished  record of loyalty than perhaps to any other single factor. The  next virtue in the SS code of honor is obedience -blind trusting  obedience to the SS Leaders. In order to educate SS men to absolute  honesty and respect for State and private property beginning in 1936  all locks wore removed from lockers in SS barracks. The results are  said to bo good. Truthfulness is another virtue hold up to SS men.  The word of an SS man is to bo as good as a written agreement. An  SS man who tends toward drunkoness must givenhis word.of honor not  to touch alcohol for two or throe years. Should he break his word  of honor ho is expected to act in accordance with the old law of  soldiers and presumably commit suicide. Should ho refuse to give his word of honor he is discharged from the SS.  5893, -77 CONFIDENTIAL The following SS institutions are known or assumed to bo connoctod with the training of tho Gonoral SS the Leadership School of the. Genoral SS Ftihrerschule dor Allgomeinon SS at Munich-Daohau  II tho SS Training Camp SS-Ubungslager at Dachau the Main Riding Academy of tho SS SS-Hauptreitschulc at Munich tho SS Riding Academy SS-Reitorschulo at Hamburg the SS Motor Transport School   SS-Kraftfahrsohule at Borne in Oldonburg. Probably the training institutions of tho Military SS see below c-7-i are utilized also by tho Gonoral SS.  Tho military efficiency of the Genoral SS is believed to bo reasonably high.   j SS Strongholds -Unconfirmed reports state that two pill boxes have been installed on every elevated railway station in Berlin. The SS is also said to occupy apartments at strategic intersections in tho capital and to control tho approaches to Berlin. The SS suburban settlements at Berlin Vienna and elsewhere constitute potential strongholds in time of civil strife. It is pos sible that tho SS Defence Farmers Wehrbauern are concentrated not only on the frontiers but also in politically uncertain ares of tho Reich.   Tho Military SS -Waffon-SS - a General -Armed SS units existed from the very beginning of tho National Socialist regime. Tho SS Staff Guard Adolf Hitler SS-Stabswacho Adolf Hitler paraded May 1 1933 equipped with'steel helmets and carbines. Shortly thoroaftor tho organization of Hitler's own regiment the Lcibstandartc  Adolf Hitler was completed under command of Sepp Dietrich and stationed in Berlin. Subsequently Standarte z/i Deutschland was organized and stationed in Munich Standarto 4 2 Germania in Hamburg iirolson and Sadolfzcli the SS ignal Corps Battalion in Dresden. 'cr Filhror was organized in former Austria and stationed at Vienna Klagenfurt and Graz. Those  5393, -7S -CONFIDENTIAL  full-time barracked S3 Formations arc designated SS-Verfilgungstruppen  VTo In peace and imr they are at the exclusive disposal of the Ftihror.  The S3 Donthhead Formations -TotenkopfverbEndo con stitute a socorjd branch of the Military 3S . Originally they were volunteers drawn from the General S3 and employed to replace the Storm Troopers SA in guarding the concentration camps. They still perform this function and other tasks connected with state security. Their unsavory reputation for cruelty hardly seems exaggerated.  Formations from both branches of the Military S3 have fought with the Gorman armed forces almost from the beginning of the present war.  The pre-war missions of the Military S3 were to provide ab solutely reliable protection for the Fithrer to guard the concentra tion camps and to constitute a mobile striking force to crush any internal disorder. The expansion of the Military S3 now in progress creates a loiml armed corps to quell disorder within the hGich and suppress any future incipient mutiny of the armed forces. The distri bution of the S3 Divisions on the Russian Front late this spring  1942 shows two S3 Divisions in the Northern Sector two in the Central Sector two in the Couthorn Sector -a convenient distri bution for dealing with mutiny which of course does not imply that the-distribution was not dictated by other considerations. The ex pansion of the Military S3 prevents the dispersion of th.e General S3 through induction into the regular armed forces. .Members of the Gen eral S3 are already found in considerable numbers among all branches of the Wehrmacht and constitute no doubt valuable listening .posts for the Security Service of the S3 Reich Leader see b-3-e. How ever continued induction of General S3 members into the Wohrmacht would have immobilized large numbers of the most loyal supporters of the regime whoroas concentrated in formations of the Military S3 they can be withdrawn as fighting units and employed at the discretion of   5393, -79 CONFIDENTIAL  the FUhrcr. The formation of now units of Military SS recruited largely from former non-adhorents of the SS also serves to divert charges that the S3 is not making a sufficient sacrifice of lifo in the present conflict. This diversion of public opinion is aided by increased emphasis in Gorman news on the military feats of the S3. Actually a considerable fraction of the old loyal General S3 is still in civil lifo. Lost its ubiquity provoke criticism S3 men in  Q '-'  Austria are said to bo forbidden to wear their uniforms.  Reports of friction between the Military S3 and the Gorman armed forces are perennial. Himmler the officer candidate of the World War seems in his early days in Berlin to have sought admittance into circles frequented by the General Staff In this ho failed and his failure was aggravated by the fact that the late Hlihnlein Leader  .of tho National Socialist Mounted Corps ind Hierl Loader of the Reich Labor Service both former general staff officers succeeded  where ho had failed. Tho S3 criticized the Army as reactionary. However after the changes of February 1938 there was greater co operation between the two. Friction increased again with tho rapid expansion of the Military S3 in tho present war. Members of both forces are reported at certain times and in certain areas to have displayed reluctance in saluting or to have omitted this amenity al together. Members of the armed forces claim that tho feats of the  Military S3 obtain an undeserved share of publicity. Tho Wohrmacht looks askance at the growing power and indopendencc of the Military S3. Unconfirmed reports speak of recriminations between Hitler and tho generals of tho Wohrmacht Hitler charging tho Wchrmacht with  wanton sacrifice of S3 troops tho Wohrmacht replying that tho losses result from recklessness and lack of skill. Notwithstanding repeated rumors of dissensions between Wohrmacht and S3 tho German military  machine does not scorn materially weakened. In fact complimentary remarks and frank admiration for the Military S3 are not infrequent among tho other branches of tho Armed Forces.   5893,  80 CONFIDENTIAL For ranks and uniforms of the Military SS see above c-2.   b Strength Statistics of the Military SS. l Active Military S3. -A reliable source estimated that there were in the early part of 1942 at least twelve SS divisions and five SS police divisions in the field. In addition regiments and smaller units wore stationed in Germany and Gorman-oocupied Europe. The strength of the Military SS is still decidedly on the increase. Ru mors speak of twenty to forty divisions. 2. Trained Reserve -Members of the General SS still in civil life constitute a trained or somi-trainod reserve of the Military S3. In the early part of 1942 the strength of this category is believed to have boon between 100 000 and 200 000. The police on duty within the Reich and those in police-training battal ions constitute a trained reserve for the S3 police divisions. Lack of adqquato data forbids a numerical estimate. However with an acute shortage of police for domestic duty it seems that few could bo spared from this source.  c Organization of the Military S3 -1. Re lation to the other Armed Forces -An official statement of the Gorman General Staff September 17 1941 declared that the Military S3 is in principle under the command of the S3 Reich Leader however that in the present war several units of the Military S3 arc under temporary command of the Commandcr-in-Shief of tho Army for perform ance'.of military-missions. Members of these formations are soldiers in regard to rights and duties. Nevertheless tho S3 Reich Loader directs the indoctrination of S3 soldiers and retains tho right of substitution. In tho latter part of 1940 Hitler is believed to have assumed the Army that tho strength in peace time of the Military S3 would not exceed 5 10 of tho poacetimo strength of the Army. It was reported in the early part of 1942 that the Military S3 had achieved independent status as a sort of fourth arm.  5893, -01 - CONFIDENTIAL  2 Iho Commanders of tho Military SS   Hitlur is supremo ..commander of Military S3 by virturo of his position as Supremo Commando.r of tho Armed Forces as Commander-in-Chiof of tho Army and as supremo Commander of tho entire S3.  Thpro is considerable evidence that some if not all S3 divisions operate on more or less independent missions being shifted from one corps to another after completion of a particular task. A reliable Polish source now September 1942 speaks of an S3 Army Corps composed of two-S3 divisions. This S3 Corps' numerical strength totaled forty thousand menj a large part \ms located on the French Channel Coast near Caen and Vernouil  The senior S3 general is Josef Sapp Dietrich. Dietrich now 1942 fifty was born in Bavarian Suabia received a meager education Volksschule arid during tho World War rose' to Deputy First  .Sergeant. He holds tho rank of General of the Military S3 General dor Waffcn-SS. i.e. a rank often held by German army corps commanders Dietrich commands the SS-Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler now expanded into a larger formation.  Max Jdttner Chief of tho Command Office of the Military S3 has professional military qualifications. Jdttnor now Generafleutnant dor Waffen-SS Major General U.S.A. served more than ton years as an active officer of the former Imperial Army including service as divisional general staff officer. See above c-6-g.  3. Units of the Military S3 -The S3 divisio is believed to bo somewhat smaller and more maneuvrable than the normal motorized division-of the Germany Army. Save certain S3 Police divisions all 33 divisions are believed to be motorized. The follow ing units have boon identified a. SS Division Adolf Hitler motorized. -is believed to have been formed from tho Leibstandarte-4 Lj Adolf Hitler.  5C93, -32 -CONFIDENTIAL   Coirmianding Offloors C/oncral of the Military SS Sopp Dietrich. Soo abovo c-2. The Loibstandartc was mentioned in April 1942 at Tanganrog on the Sea of Azov. S3 Division Reich motorized - Commanding Officert ' Gorioralleutnant Paul Haussor 62 years old ' listed late in 1940'as Inspector of the SS-A/erfllgungstruppo.  G.S.O.ls SS-SturmbanhfUhror Ostondorff.  Compositions Standartc Deutschland and Standarto  3 Dor Filhrer possibly other Standarten SS-Verfttgungstruppe Artillery Regiment A.R. Divisional Armored Reconnaissance Battalion   P.A.A. Panzeraufklilrungabtoilung Combat Engineers Battalion Signal Corps Battalion Motorized Divisional Trains Kraftfahrkol. and Medical Company San Kp. The division was formed from previously independent regi ments. It fought with groat dash in Poland and ths West at times incurring casualties through ovcr-confidoncc.  c. SS-Division - Commanding Officers Goncrallcutnant Dommolhubeh former commander of Stahdarte Germania.  d. SS-Division - Commanding Officer -Generalloutnant Schmidt probably Schmitt.  o. SS Police Division -SS-Polizeidivision . ... Commanding Offleerss l Western campaign Generalleutnant Pfoffer-Wildenbruch 2 Russian pampaign until Aug. 10 1941 Generalleutnant dcr Polizei .Arthur Mdlverstedt killed while attacking the Luga Position near Leningrad 3 GoneraImajorVder   Waffen-SS Walter Krttgor. G.S.O.ls 1  5393, CONFIDENTIAL  CompoaitiQni Police Rifle Regiment 1 Pol. Soh. R.l i.e. Polizei-SchtitZen-Regiment l Police Rifle Regiment 2 Police Rifle Regiment 3 SS Police Artillery Regiment Divisional Armored Recon naissance Battalion P.A.A. Combat Engineers Battalion Signal Corps Battalion/Motorized Divisional Trains Kraftfahrkol. and Medical Company San Kp.  The' SS Police Division was formed October 1939 by drafts from police units in all parts of Germany. Early in the war Hitler ordered-26 000 police recruits trained-in the shortest possible time. Part or all of this group had been inducted as enlisted men and non commissioned personnel into the SS' Police Divisions at the commencemen of the Russb-German conflict.  The division distinguished itself in the Argonne Forest  1940 ' ' and presumably was stationed for a time in Paris. At the be ginning of the Russian campaign it marched 1000 kilometers cross country on unimproved roads to the front Leningrad Sector. It had few motor transports and was largely horse-drawn. As a part of the Army of Colonel General H0ppner it penetrated the Stalin Line near Luga  f. SS Police Division - Commanding Officers Generalmajor der Polizei Wiinnenberg. Wiinneriberg is mentioned in this position February 15 1942. It is not known whether he succeeded Krttgcr e or commands a second SS Police division.  g. SS Deathhoad Division -3STotenkopf- Division or SS-T-Div. motorized. Commanding Officer Goncralmajor Theodor Eicke listed late in 1940 as Ftthrer of tho SS Doathhoad Regiments and the Con centration .Camps.  G.S.0.1 SS-Standartenftthror Frhr. v. Mortigny Composition SS Doathhead Infantry Regiment 1 SS-T-I.R.l SS Doathhead Infantry Regiment 2 SS Deathhead Infantry Regiment 3   5393, CONFIDENTIAL   -84-   SS Doathhead Artillery Rogimont Divisional Armorod Roconnaissanco Battalion Combat Eng.inoprs Battalion Signal Corps Battalion Motor ized Divisional Trains Kraftfahrkol. and Modical Company.  The SS Doathhoad'Division was formed.Octobor 1939 mainly from existing concentration camp guard units. It was hotly engaged  V ' '  throughout tho fighting in France its morale was loss high than that of SS Division Reich b.  h. SS Division Commanding Officeri Genoralmajor Klepper i . S Division Viking Commanding Officeri Goncralmajor Stein/or possibly Steiner former commander of Standarte LL 1 Deutschland. // J  Composition Standartc J J Germania peacetime stations Hamburg Arolscn and Radolfzell Standartc ij Westland compose largely of Dutch and Flemish voluntoors Standarte Nordland  composed largely of Danish-and Norwegian volunteers tho latter drawn mainly from Quisling's Hird includes also some Swedes and Finns. Other details concerning composition are lacking.  Late in 1941 tho division consisted mainly .of Germans with 10% Scandonavians and an unknown percentage of other Germanic volun teers. It saw action at Stalino and Dnepropetrovsk where it was forced back to tho west bank of the Dnepr after suffering considerable casualities. Discipline is said to bo not good the training of re placements quite faulty especially in rifle marksmanship. Early in 1942 the division was reported withdrawn owing to general undepend ability and dirsorders. Late-this summer 1942 it was serving in Finland where it was recently visited by Himmler.  . S Division Nordmark .  Commanding Officer Goncralmajor Kepler probably SS- Gruppenftlhrur Georg Koppler former commander of Standarte 3 in Vienna.  15893, r c   -dp CONFIDENTIAL  k. S3 Mountain Division. In April 1942 ono S3 Mountain Division was reported being organized. S3 Security Divisions -Sicherungsdivisionen -Russian guerrilla forces cause groathavoc by sabotago along the linos of communications and by attacking supply units on the march. To combat this the German Armed Forces organized Security  Divisions composed of S3 troops. Sich. Div. 265 has boon identified. m. S3 Cavalry Brigade -SS-Kavallerio- Brigadc. Horse-mounted. Commanding Officers SS-Standartoiifilhrer Hermann Fcgojein  judged by photograph to bo between 30 and 40. The father of Fcgclcin was proprietor of a riding academy.  Composition Probably includes the S3 Deathhoad Mounted Regiment formerly commanded by Fegelein also bicycle -and motorcycle units Radfahror KradschUtzcn infantry howitzers Ktibelwagen  light five'-passenger personnel carriers used as antitank gun prime movers munition and baggage trains.  The Brigade fought principally in the southeastern sector of the Russian.front. In the middle of March 1942 it was operating in the Leningrad sector. It won distinction in January 1942 by chocking strong Soviet forces which had broken through the lines and threatened the rear of a Gorman division.  n. Fire Protection Police Regiments Fouorschutzpolizci- Rogimcntcr -Those are special units of the Order Police attached to the armed forces and employed to save vital in stallations and perform other tasks. They are not designated as be longing to the S3 but arc indirectly under its control. One regiment served in the Western campaign 1940. Another was organized the mid dle of 1941. Cf. b-3-c-6  l Fire Protection Police Regiment  Sachsen.   รยง93, -86 -CONFIDENTIAL  Commanding Officers Colonel of the Firo Protection Police Rumpf. TRe tasks performed by this regiment during the Western cam paign included extinguishing fires which originated in the zone of operations during the night the purpose being to deprive the enemy of a means of orientation. It sought to preserve in particular supply dumps and the living quarters of.the troops. During the ad vance companies of the regiment /ere assigned special tasks by the High Command of the Army. Thus they were charged with the preser vation of storage facilities and the long-distance telephone equip ment in specified localities . This regiment earned the gratitude of the-Armed Forces by saving 100 000 tons of oil from the oil storage facilities ignited by the retreating enemy in France.  o. Other Units of the Military S3 - There are SS regiments and smaller units stationed in Germany and Ger man-occupied Europe. Other'units are the S3 Volunteer Legion Flanders  S3 Vrijwilligorslegioon Vlaandoren the Volunteer Legion of the  Netherlands and similar formations.  ..In addition to the types of units already mentioned there  are antitank units antiaircraft units mine detection battalions   Minensuchabteilungon and 33 propaganda companies the latter with  the-dual function of maintaining troop morale and providing propa  ganda for domestic use.  During the Western campaign 1940 S3 Workshop Companies   Werkstatt-Kompariieh der 83 followed tho mechanized S3 combat units  repairing automobiles motorcycles etc. The personnel comprised  auto mechanics saddlers cabinet-makers blacksmiths weldors paint  ers technical officers'. The equipment included Diesel motors oxy   acetyleno welding apparatus lathes portable hydraulic automobile  platforms cables replacement parts and electrical apparatus.  In March 194.1 Hitler is said to have ordorod the formation of S3 naval units 20 000 men strong. Presumably the-Gorman Admiralty dissuaded Hitler as evidence of S3 naval units is still lacking.   5893, -87 -CONFIDENTIAL  In the autumn of 1941 SG panzer troops in tropical uniform Tflforo reportod being trained in the Berlin area.   0  S3 air units existed in 1933 however all traces of them  then disappear possibly at the insistence of G8ring Recently many  rumors have boon current that the SS is demanding an independent air  force.  Actually the S3 has had indirect control of aviation units for some time. In the Geman-occupied eastern areas from the Far North to the Black Sea task units Flugboroitschafton of the Police Flying Squadron Polizeifliegorstaffol are under the command of the Higher Loaders of the SS and Police. The task units arc based at the larger airports in the aroa. Their radius of operations extends to 3000 kilometers. The typos-of planes employed are Messorschmitt Taifun Fioselcr Storch and no doubt others not identified. The personnel includes fighter pilots. The Fieseler Storch type of plane belonging to tho Police Flying Squadron was used in November 1941 to transport munitions and provisions to encircled units of the Police and Wohrmacht fighting in the central sector of tho Russian front.   d Personnel Characteristics of the Military S3. The bulk of the personnel is drawn from volunteers though it seems that those who' are'already members of tho Military-SS Re serve must accept the call to active duty when it comes. In rare instances replacements forS&units arc reported to have boon secured by transfer of formations 'from the Armed Forces possibly only to  makc'up for heavy losses until S3 replacements are at hand. However  for the-occasional subordination of certain smaller units of tho Wehrmacht to. the.' cpinmand of S3 officers there is definite evidence.  The lowest rajnks of the .Military 33 are composed princi pally of Gorman formo-fVnon-adherents of the S3 and now increasingly . of foreign volunteer and finally to a lesser extent of members of tho General 33. Foreign recruits arc to be of Germanic stock al    5893,  88  confidentb. though tho Walloon contingents fighting on tho Russian front are now said to ho pomitted to join tho SS. A strenuous effort is made to gain volunteers among the Alsatians Flemings Dutch Danes Nor wegians and Estonians. Pressure is put upon Swedish volunteers in Finland to join. Among the volunteers for the Military SS are also Finns. Tho already large contingent of racial Germans Volksdeutscho will now be swelled as a result of a recent development permitting 18 000 Gorman-Hungarians to.enter the Military SS. The general requirements for admittance to the SS officer training schools SS-Junkerschulon and to tho units of the Military SS follow   1 Aryan origin for enlisted personnel verification as far as 1800 for officer personnel verification as far as 1750.  2 Good reputation.  3 The qualities of character and mind needed for military service.  4 Compliance with SS selection standards.  5 In tho case of minors tho permission of parents or guardians in written form. Physical as well as ago requirements differ for the various formations of the Military SS. SS-Leibstandarto xxdolf Hitler November 1941 -Age 17-22. Minimum height 1.78 meters or 5 ft. 10 ins. Summer of 1940 1.80 meters or 5 ft. 10.9 ins. Period of service 2 4-g- and 12 years. SS-VerfUgungstruppe-Division Summer of 1940 -Ago 17-22. Ifinimum height 1.70 meters or 5 ft. 6.9 ins. Period of service 4 years. SS-Doathoad-Division Summer of 1940 -Age 17-26. Minimum height 1.70 meters or 5 ft. 6.9 ins. in exceptional cases 1.68 motors or 5 ft. 6.1 ins. Period of service believed to be 12 years. SS-loathoad Regiments Summer of 1940 -Age 28-39. Minimum height 1.70 motors or 5 ft. 6.9 ins. in exceptional cases 1.68 meters or 5 ft. 6.1 ins. Period of service believed to be 12 years. Those regiments of older men apparently guard the Concentration Camps .  5393, , -90 -COMFIDENIIA.L tho Reich vrore drafted October 1939 to form the first SS Police Di vision. All ranks commissioned and non-commissioned were drawn predominantly from the Protection Police Schutzpolizei. Later  26 000 newly trained recruits were inducted into the lower ranks as  privates and noncommissioned officers. Tho age-limits for police volunteers November 1941 were 17 to 35.  Little is known about the source of noncommissioned officers for the Military SS. Some are drawn from the General SS. Others are taken from the ranks and trained in SS Noncommissioned Officer Schools. See below c-7-i.  Tho officers corps of the Military SS 1936 was judged to bo far from homogeneous. Meanwhile this situation has no doubt improved. Tho higher ranks still include a number of former Imperial and Rcichswohr officers as well as some former noncommissioned offi cers. However many of the younger officers trained and indoctri nated in the SS officer schools represent a rather homogeneous group The youngest officers those commissioned during tho war come chief from the ranks of tho combat SS. Often they have gained the Iron Cross for bravery in action. A considerable fraction has a laboringclass origin. As a group the officers of the Military SS exhibit an esprit de corps which is distinctly different from that of the Wehrmacht officers. They are much more radical in their views concerning social problems.   c Finance -Service in units of tho Military SS is considered fulfillment of tho legal obligation to serve in tho armed forces. The pay-scale is equivalent to that of the regular \ armed forces . Tho same rights to preferential treatment and support of dependents are acquired by the Military-SS veterans as by veterans of the regular armed forces .  Tho funds for tho support of tho SS-Verfttgungstruppe the SS Deathhoad formations and tho SS Junker Schools come from the Reici Minister of Finance. They are administered by tho Administrative   5393, -91 -CONFIDENTIAL  Chief of the Guard Echelons of tho National Socialist Party. Soo above c-4-c. -The same sot-up is believed to apply to other forma tions of Military SS.  The SS has an independent admiriistrative system for  .veterans and veterans' dependents. See above c-4-f-13. Regional branches exist. By special arrangement with the interested agencies it was agreed that the SS administration would also secure prefer ential treatment .of former members of the Sudeten-German Free Corps and care for-their dependents. In regard to Defence Farmers hfehrbauern see above c-4-h-4   f Supply and Equipment -The organization of supply and the types of equipment of the'Military SS are believed to be much the same. as found in the -regular-Ge'mari armed forces. Some if not all SS -divisions are said to have equipment of the most modern type. Last winter 1941-4'2 . sufficient numbers of Junkers transport planes.were made available to transfer -an SS regiment  -Standarto Lapgemarclc 1 Within 24 hours from a position in the rear to -a sector of the Russian front -The Procurement Office see abqvo c-4-f-lO secures all SS equipment.  g Recruiting and-Mobilization System -Tho  tOffice for Recruiting Military SS at Berlin see above c-4-f-9 is the. apex of a recruiting organization which seems to Coincide region ally with the SS Main Sections. Branch recruiting offices exist in Holland -Belgium Denmark Norway and elsewhere. One method of gaining recruits is to have the' ho'ros of the Military SS Ritterkreuztr- Sgor extol SS ideology and SS valor in a sorios of talks to the Hitler Youth and Jungvolk.  Tho mobilization system is described above c-6-g.   h Strategic and Tactical Doctrines. -See above c-G-h  i Training Morale and Efficiency - Soo also section on tho training of the General SS c-G-i.  58930', -92 CONFIDENTIAL  Nothing is known about tho military training given S3 privates although it is assumed to be similar to that of the Gorman Army. Indoctrination with S3 ideas no doubt is assigned an impor tant role as many volunteers have had no previous connection with tho S3. When S3 troops are behind the front linos participation in athletics is oncouragod and servos to keep up morale. See above c-4-f-14.  Noncommissioned personnel is trained at S3 Noncommissioned Officor Schools 3S-UntorfU.hrerschulen tho exact location and numbe of which is unknown. One S3 Noncommissioned Officer School is pro bably located on the shores of tho Lake of Constance  The S3 noncommissioned officer candidates Unterftl.hroranivflrtcr are selected from those S3 men who have made good at the front and at the some time possess tho other necessary qualifications to become a noncommissioned officer. Each group of candidates usually includes men with the Iron Cross First or Second Class with the Storm Insignia Sturmabzeichen and sometimes the Wounded Insignia. The course of training lasts four months. The daily schedule is rigorous and occupies the noncommissioned officor candi date from six in the morning until ten at night. Tho candidates are housed in pleasant barracks six men occupying one room. The quarter are decorated with inscriptions such as Ich dien T serve . The staff of instructors is made up of commissioned and noncommis sioned S3 officers who usually have won distinction and not in frequently are slightly incapacitated from wounds. Details concern  ing the training are lacking except that it is known to include  close-order drill and sports along with instruction in the use of  machine guns and light artillery.  Officer candidates are chosen from the Military and General S3. In the Military S3 the choice is made by the Commanders Kommandeure. Tho selection is based oh the character and military and   The motto of the Prince'PfWales first assumed by tho Black Princo after Crecy. 13 46 where. John King of Bohemia whoso motto it had boon was killed in battle  5S93, -93  confidential  mental ability of the applicant. Previous social and financial  .status is said to play no part. There arc no formal educational re quirements. However those without junior college Gymnasium train ing must be above average and work day and night in order to complete the course. The number of officer candidates periodically selected from a unit is a matter of conjecture. A photograph of such a group chosen from the S3 Doathhead Division while it was stationed in Franco early 1941 showed 60-70 men. If this group was the only one solodted then this number of officer candidates constituted about j /o of the division's total strength.  -.The S3 officer training course lasts about 16 months. It consists of two parts running parallel with each other l in doctrination with S3 ideas 2 military instruction corresponding to that given at the military academics Kricgs.schulon of the Armed Forces. For the first two or three months the candidates arc in structed by officers who in some if not all cases belong to the same division. After this preliminary instruction the candidates be come S3 Junkers in the Junker Schools at TBlz or Braunschweig. The duration of the course here is ten months 1940. Before the war it lasted a year. During the first part the officer candidate rises to the rank of Standarten-Junker. After passing the intermediate examination he is promoted to Senior Standarten-Junker Standartcn- Oberjunker.  Before the war the average day at a .SS Junker School began with early morning exorcises in riding. The remainder of the morning ms filled with theoretical instruction consisting of l in doctrination with S3 ideas 2 military science and tactics includ  ing a knowledge of air power combat onginoors and of the press   b instruction in history racial science and languages. The after noon was devoted to practical training. This centered around in fantry exercises in open fields. Sports woro encouraged. In order t secure more time for study the Junkers are relieved of the menial  5693, -94 -CONFIDENTIAL  tasks ordinarily performed by enlisted men. These are attended to  by units of crack troops which also serve as examples for the future  officers.  Upon completion of the curriculum at the Junker School  the officer candidate is given a final course of instruction lasting  three months. The purpose of the course Einweisungslehrgang is to  familiarize the candidate with his tasks and practical duties as a  platoon commander Zugfiihrer Following this courso the candidate  is commissioned a second lieutenant SS-Untersturmf'dhrer either on  the anniversary of the Munich Putsch November 9 or on the FUhrer's  birthday April 20. At the commissioning ceremonies the young second  lieutonant receives the S3 sword from the Reich Leader of the SS  and is prosonted by him to the Filhrer. The further training of the  newly commissioned officers is supervised by the Inspector of the S3  Junker Schools.  In addition to Junker Schools the 33 maintains a riding  academy at Munich and Hamburg a motor transport school Kraftfahr   schulo at Borne in Oldenburg an Engineering School for the Military  S3 at Vienna end an S3 Medical Academy SS-Krztliche Akademie at  Graz.. See above c-4-f-6  /in S3 Motor Transport School recently July 1942 identi  fied at Vionna-SchBnbrunn trains members of the Hitler Youth aged  16 to 17 from all over the Reich who cither have applied or expect  to apply for admission to the Military S3. Tho course lasts six week  and tho normal enrollment is three hundred. Tho curriculum includes  the theory of the internal combustion engine instruction in driving  as well as making minor repairs. Tho instructors aro S3 sergeants   Untorscharfilhrer . Instructional films arc also utilized on a largo .scale ' /  Some S3 units aro said to be lacking in training and skill.  On tho othor hand it would be a serious error to concludo that there  aro no S3 units whose skill is not equal perhaps superior to that   5893, -95'-CONFIDENTIAL  of an average unit of the Armed Forces.  T/hile it is true that the morale of certain SS units is re ported to be not good the morale of the Military SS as a group is believed to surpass that of the Wehrmacht'. The fact that most SS soldiers are volunteers coupled with the continuous indoctrination and the privileges of SS membor's seems to guarantee the maintenance of a reasonably high morale.   8 The Security Service of the SS Reich Leader is handled in the section on the police. See-above b-3-d.  9 The' Foreign SS -The powerful Gorman SS is the prototype for similar organizations abroad principally in Germanic countries. However even the Slavic Hlinka Guards of Slovakia imi tate the SS in many respects. Hungary is also said to be organizing a formation siiftilar to the German SS.' In Norway Quisling's Hird has developed along much the same lines as the German SS. Thus early' in 1942 the first battalion ofMilitary Hird vappnhirdbataljonjt was formed.' This was then expanded to include the so-called Depot Battalion the Holmestrand Armed Hird Battalion and the Ftthrer's Quisling Guard. Eventually the Hird is to bo permitted by the German authorities to obtain full equipment for 20 000 men thus forming the nucleus of a new defence force and releasing Gorman soldiers for other tasks. The strength of the Hird was unofficially reported in February 1942 as 12 000 men. The Hird is developing aviation and has an air corps using 22 gliders xdiich nay later be replaced by motor-driven planes.  In the spring of 1941 thoHird created an intelligence  service similar to the. Security Service of the Gorman SS. See b-3   o. Under the title of Communications Department of the .Hird Staff   Hirdstabens oftorrctningsavdcling this intelligence service is  charged with the mission of keeping the Nasjonal Samling's loaders  informed of sentiment among the Norwegian people. The agents of the  intolligonco service arc carefully selected from reliable Hird men.   5S93, -96  CONFIDENTIAL  As a gonoral rule the Communications Department reports directly to the Nasjonal Samlingfe Fiihrer f/ror . Similarly the head of tho Commu nications Department is personally an.d materially responsible to tho  N.S. Ftthror Hotvevor in disciplinary matters he together with tho functionaries of tho Communications Department is subordinate to tho Hird High Command The Department has its own budget. Tho tem porary head leder of the Department was 1941 Alf Gysslor And most important from the standpoint of the German S3 the head of the Communications Department is to have a German counselor with whom he must work in intimate collaboration. Following the experience of tho \  German National Socialist Party which decided June 9 1934 that there was to be no other Party intelligence service beside tho SS Security Service the Nasjonal Samling gave the Communications De partment exclusive privileges as the Party secret information-gath ering agency. The agents of the Department are to report on the' effectiveness of Nasjonal Samling's propaganda gather information concerning the methods used by hostile propaganda such as rumors leaflets illegal newspapers combat hostile propaganda report to tho police persons or groups disseminating hostile propaganda combat provocations coming from certain persons or groups within the Nasjona'. Samling spy on persons combinations and organizations with anti- National Socialist tendencies.  Tho Norwegian SS Norges SS which was created May 25 1941 was renamed July 23 1942 the Germanic SS Nor-way Gormanske SS Norge . It is to be an indepondont branch underavdoling of tho Nasjonal Samling directly under the control of the Loader of Nasjona Samling and directly responsible to him. AJ the same time tho Ger manic SS Norway will be a branch of the Greater Germanic SS. In cidentally the General SS of tho Reich has established an SS Main Section SS-Oborabschnitt with headquarters in Oslo c-6-c-2 . The rules of the hew Germanic SS Norway .are reported to have received the, 97 CONFIDENTIAL  approval of Himmler who addod suggestions of his ovra. Ono of its  official purposes is to preserve the purity of the Norwegian race.  It will also function as a political police force.  Those eligible for the Germanic SS Norway ares l male members of Nasjonal Samling 2 Norwegian citizens who have served in the Military SS or the Norwegian Legion and 3 other Norwegian citizens approved by the General Secretariat of Nas-jonal Samling. The Loader of the Germanic SS Norway is Minister Jonas Lie.  The Germanic SS Norway intends to establish strongholds   stoottepunkter throughout Norway. At weekly mootings the members will receive instruction in the use of weapons. In addition new members will bo put through four weeks' training under German SS  leaders at Kongsvinger.  On the left sleeve of the Germanic SS uniform will appear the Sun Cross and on the right the SS badge. The counterpart of Das Sohwarze Korps will bo the Germanic SS newspaper Germanen.  The General SS Flanders Allgcmeino -Flandern vra.s foun ed at the end of 1940. By order of the Reich Command of the SS  September 1 1941 the Flemish General SS was-organized as the 1st SS Regiment Flanders l. -Standarte Flandern and is now incor porated as a part of the Reich SS. The Flemish equivalent of Das Schwarze Korps is the weekly entitled Do -Man.  The volunteers of the Flemish SS are instructed at the pre  liminary training school of tho Military SS Waffen- -Vorschule  at Schoten believed to bo Schooten on the outskirts of Antwerp .  Incidentally Belgians serving with tho Military S3 or Wohrmacht are  freed from paying taxes.  Recently in the Netherlands 800 Dutch SS men took an oath of allogianco to Hitler. The oath had tho following text Adolf Hitler Germanic Filhror to you I pledge allegiance and obedience to my superiors appointed by you until death so help me God. At   5393,  98 CONFIDENTIAL  tho samo time Mussort transferred as far as necessary for fulfilling Germanic tasks the Dutch S3 to tho Reich Leader of the German S3. The General S3 of tho Reich has for some time maintained an S3 Main Section with headquarter at She Hague c-6-c-2 .  At the end of this summer 1942 Hitler ordered the founda tion of an Estonian Legion as part of the Military S3. Estonia suf fered relatively more from the previous Soviet occupation and the Estonian people have collaborated with the Gomans to a greater ex tent than the Latvians and Lithuanians. Latvia and Lithuania have as yet no S'S legion.  Recruiting offices for tho Estonian S3 Legion have been opened in all important centers and appeals arc made through both the radio and tho press. Tho new recruits must sign up for tho duration of the war. Gorman sources state that all Estonians now incorporatod in Goman military units as wall as the thirteen thousand Estonian volunteers how serving with police battalions in tho Leningrad sector  the will bo attached to/Estonian S3 Legion.   10 Conclusions Tho S3 with its auxiliaries constitutes an efficient or ganization for defence offence and the consolidation of military and political gains. Tho careful intelligence work of tho Security Police and Security Service prior to the invasion of Austria Bohemia Moravia Poland and other countries enabled tho German police follow ing in the wake of the German armies to checkmate subversive elements effectively protect communications and restore order thus roleasi ing a maximum of Gorman troops for immediate military tasks. In the conquered territories earmarked for future annexation tho S3 proceed ed to consolidate the Gorman foothold by expulsion of certain cate gories of inhabitants and to conduct tho strategic-political coloni zation of tho territory by racial Germans. The domestic role of tho S3 as protector of tho National Socialist regime is not loss importan   5893, -99 CONFIDENTIAL  Competent observers boliovo that as long as tho SS with its auxiliaries remains unimpaired and as long as the German Armed Forces suffer no major military disaster tho S3 and police will con tinue to constitute an almost insuperable barrier to a German revo lution The SS and Police are well prepared to cope with such a situation. Few revolutionary plots escape the surveillance of the Security Police and Security Service. Those that ripen beyond this stage can be met effectively by the Order Police backed by tho Mili tary SS and if noed be by the General SS.  As an organization tho SS contains elements of strength and weakness. In evaluating factors of SS strength ono should not allow tho indisputable cruelty of SS-controlled agencies such as the con centration camps to emotionalize one's judgment. Thus easily over looked is the idealism which attracts some of the best elements of Gorman youth. Instead of a shallow sort of racialism centering arount anti-Semitism the SS offers an intensely practical system of positiv eugenics. To those who lack idealism the SS offers social status in the now SS aristocracy it offers economic security by placing its members in government and Party positions it facilitates tho pro motion and advancement of those already established in positions. Since tho SS has much to offer it was before tho war in a position to reject all applicants except those with tho highest qualifications in this way further increasing its strength through the acquisition of choice personnel. The SS has benefited by clover consistent leadership unmarrod by brilliance. It has known how to retain tho favor of the Filhrer. To these elements of strength should bo addod a powerful centralized orga.nizat.ton an efficient intelli gence service SS control of the polico and a self-contained SS army.  Elements of potential weakness are found l in the diffi culty of proper indoctrination and assimilation of the greatly ex panded Military SS and 2 in tho professionalization of SS members   5 93, -100 -CONFIDENTIAL  serving in the police Security Service and Military SS. Both those throats to homogeneity arc being actively combatted.   5093, CONFIDENTIAL Paragraph 25. Public Order '. Polioe and the Elite Guard SS .APPENDIX Part 1 The Higher Police Authorities die HBheren Polizeibehttrden in Germany .Anhalt The State Governor Sedchsstatthalter in Braunschweig dnd Anhalt State Government Landesregiorung Anhalt -in Dessau. Baden The Ministry of Interior Ministerium des Innorn in Karlsruhe.  -101   Bavaria The District Presidents RogiorungsprEsidenten in Ansbach Munich Regensburg Speyer Augsburg Mtfctchen Ratisbon WErzburg Braunschweig Brunswick The Ministry of Interior Ministcrium dos Inncrn in Braunschweig. Bremen The Ruling Mayor Rogieronder B&rgormeistor in.Bremen. Carinthia Reiohsgau KErnton The District President RogierungsprHsident as representative of the State Governor in Klagonfurt. Lower Danube Roiohsgau Nioderdonau The State Governor in Vienna. Upper Danube Reichsgau Oberdonau  The State Governor in Linz. Danzig -'West Prussia Reichsgau Danzig -Westpreussen  The District Presidents in  Bromberg ' Danzig Marionworder Hamburg The State Governor Reichsstatthalter in Hamburg -State AdminiS tration Staatsverwaltung -in Hamburg.   5893, -102 -   C0NFIDENT1A.  Paragraph 25. Public-Ordor Police aud Elit.o Guard รยงg APPEMDIX -Part 1  Hessen The State Govornor Reiohsstatthalter in Hessen -State Government  Landosregierung  in Darmstadt. Lippe The State Governor in Lippe and Schaumburg-Lippo.-State Government Lippo -in Detmold. Mocklenburg The State Ministry Staatsministerium -Department of Interior  Abt. Inneres -in Schwerin. Oldenburg The Ministry of Interior Ministerium dcs Innern in Oldenburg. Prussia  Tho District Presidents Reg.icrungsprftsidenten in Aachen Hildoshoim Oppoln  Aix-la-Chapelle Kassel Osnabrlick Allonstein Kattowitz Potsdam Arnsberg Koblenz Schleswig Aurich Kdnigsberg i. Pr Schneidemtthl Breslau Kftslin Sigmaringon Cologne Kftln Liegnitz Stade Dttssoldorf Liineburg Stettin Erfurt Magdeburg -Trier Frankfurt a.d.O. Merseburg ViTiesbaden Gumbinnon Minden i. W. Zichenau Hanover Mtinster i. W. The Police President in Berlin. Saarland The Reich Commissar for Saarland at Saarbrttckon. Salzburg Reiohsgau Salzburg The State Governor Reichsstatthalter in Salzburg. Saxony Chemnitz Dresden Leipzig Zwickau Sohaumburg-Lippo The State government in Bttckoburg.   5893, -103 -   CONFIDENTLIL Paragraph 25. Public Order Police and the Elite Guard SS. APPENDIX Part 1  Styria Reichsgau Steiemark The State Governor in Graz. Sudetonland Roichsgau Sudotonland Tho District Presidents in Aussig Karlsbad Troppau Thuringia Thtlringon Tho Ministry of Interior Minisbarium dos Innern in Woimar. Tyrol Roiohsgau Tirol rait Vorarlborg Tho State Governor in Innsbruck Vienna Reiohsgau Men Tho State Governor Roichsstatthalter in Vienna Wartheland ReichsgauMrtheland The District Presidents in Hohensalza Litzmannstadt Lodz Posen  Vi'Cirttemberg Tho Ministry of Interior inneministerium in Stuttgart.  Part 2 State Police Administration Units  Staatliche Polizeiverwaltungen August 1 1941 P -Police Presidio Polizcipritsidium. D -Police Direction  Polizeidiroktion. 0 -Police Office Polizoiamt. L -State Police Unit diroctod by a Land Councilor Landrat.  Aaohon p Aussig P Brbtorfeld D Bremen P Altonburg D Badon-Badon D Bochum P Breslau P Augsburg P Berlin p Braunschweig P Bromborg P  5893, CONFIDENTIAL   -104 -   Paragraph 25. Public Order Police and the Elite Guard SS .  Bribe P Chemnitz P Cologne KtJln P Cuxhaven D Danzig P Darmstadt P Dessau p Dortmund P Dresden P Duisburg P Dlisseldorf P Ebingen o Elbing P Erfurt P Essen P Esslingen D Flensburg D Frankfurt/kain P Frankfurt/Oder D Freiburg i.Br. p Friedrichshafen . D  Gera D  Giessen d  Gleiwitz p  Gbppingen 0  Gotenhafen p   Gdynia  Gotha D  Graudenz D  Graz p  APPENDIX  Part 2 Halle P Hamburg p Hamm D Hanau D Hannover p Heidelberg D Heidenheim 0 Heilbronn D Hof D  Innsbruck d Jena D Kaiserslautern D Karlsbad D Karlsruhe P Kassel p Kattowitz P Kehl L Kiel P Klagenfurt D Koblenz P KBnigsberg p Konstanz L Lahr L Looben d Leipzig p Lesfau D Linz p Litzmannstadt p LUrrach L  Ludwigsburg D Ludvfigshafen P Lttbeck P Luxemburg D Magdeburg P Mannheim P ' Mainz p Marburg a/D. D Memel d Metz P M.Gladbach- P  Rheydt Mlilhauson P Mttnchen P   Mimich Mbnster Niirnberg- p  Ffirth Oberhausen P Offenbach d Offonburg L Oppeln Pforzheim D Plauen P Posen P Potsdam P '' Rastatt L Recklinghausen P Regensburg D Reichenberg P Routlinger 0 .   5893, CONFIDENTIA.L  -105 -   Paragraph 25. Public Order Police and the Elitg Guard SS. APPENDIX  Part 2 Rostock P Thorn D Wiener-Neustadt D Saarbriickon P Tilsit D YTiesbadon P Salzburg D Troppau D Wilhelmshavcn P Schramborg o Tllbingen 0 YJittenborg D SchwSb.-Grafind 0 Tuttlingon 0 Worms d  Schvj onningon 0 Ulra D YJupportal P SosnovTitz P Waldenburg p Wttrzburg P Stottin P Ylaldshut L Zella-Mohlis 0  St. PBlton D Yioimar p Znaim D Strassburg P Weissenfels P Zweibrlicken o Stuttgart WesermUndo p Zwickau F  Suhl D Wien p  Vienna  Part 3  Tho Stato Criminal Polioo Summor 1940  Staatlicho Kriminalpolizei '  The naraes of cities with suporvisory Main Branches of the. Stato Criminal Polico Kriminalpolizeiloitstollen are underscored.. The names of cities with ordinary Branches Kriminalpolizoistellon are listed without any special designation. A is appended to the names of cities in which tho functions of the Criminal Polico are performed by a Criminal Department Kriminalabteilung attached to tho local Stato Police Administration Unit Staatliche Polizeiverwaltung . Aachen Baden-Baden A Braunschweig Bruchsal A Altenburg A Berlin Bromen Bribe A Augsburg Bittorfeld A Breslau Chemnitz Aussig a Bochum Bromberg Cologne K&ln   5893, -106 CONFIDENTIAL Paragraph 25. Public Order Police and the Elite Guard S3.  Cuxhavon 4 Danzig Darmstadt Dessau Dortmund Dresden Duisburg a DUssoldorf . Ebingen a Elbing n. . Erfurt Essen Esslingon A Flensburg Frankfurt a/l.t Frankfurt a.d.O. Freiburg A Friodrichshafon A Gera A Giessen A Gleiwitz A Gmlind u GBppingen A Gotenhafen ' A   Gdynia Gotha A Graudonz Graz Halle Hamburg  APPENDIX Part 3 Hamm A Hanau A Hannover Heidelberg A Heidenheim A Heilbronn A Hof A IA. Hohonsalza Innsbruck Jena A Kaiserslautern a Kalisch A Karlsbad Karlsruhe Kassol Kattowitz Kohl A Kiel Klagonfurt Koblenz A KBnig.sborg Konstanz A Lahr A Leipzig Leslau A  Linz Litzmannstadt  Lodz  LBrrach A Llibeck A  Ludwigsburg A  Ludwigshafon -Magdoburg -.  Mainz A  Momel A  M.-Gladbach A  MBnchon   Munich  Mttnstor A  Nlirnberg  Oborhausen A  Offenbach A  Offonburg a  Oppeln.  Pforzheim A  Plauen  Poson  Potsdam A  Prag   Prague Rastatt A Recklinghausen Regensburg Reichenberg Routlingon A ' Rostock A Saarbrttckeh Salzburg SchneidemBthl Schramberg A, --COFFIDSMIliiL Paragraph 25. Publio Order Police and the Elite Guard SS.  ..APPENDIX . Part 3  Schwenningon a ' Tttbingen ii Wilhelmshaven  Schwerin Uln a.d.D. A j'it Qnbcrg A  Speyer A Vienna Wion Worms A  St. Pttlton A Villingon A Wuppertal  Stettin Waldenburg Schl. A Wurzburg  Stuttgart Waldshut A Zolla-Mehlis A  Suhl A Yie'imar Zichenau  Thorn A Weisspnfels A Znaim A Tilsit Yfesermlinde A Zweibrttckon A Troppau Wiener-Noustadt A Zwickau Wiesbaden A  Part 4  The State Police and Secret State Police Summer 1940  Staatspolizei and Goheime..Staatspolizei  The Main Branches of the State Police Staatspolizeileitstellon are underscored. The remaining cities have ordinary Branches of the State Police Staatspolizcistollon .  Erfurt   Aachen Brlinn Frankfurt a/k   Allonstcin Chemnitz Augsburg Cologne K&ln Frankfurt a.d.O. Graudenz   Berlin Danzig Bielefeld Darmstadt Graz Braunschweig  Dessau Hallo a.d.S. Bremen Dortmund Hamburg Breslau Dresden  Hannover Bromberg Diisseldorf Hildosheim   5893, Paragraph 25.  Hohensalza  Innsbruck Karlsbad Karlsruhe Kassel Kattowitz Kiel Klagenfurt Koblenz Kttnigsberg KBslin Leipzig Liegnitz Linz  Litzmannstadt  108 C0MFIDENTIA.L Publio Order. Police and the Elite Guard S3. APPENDIX Part 4  Llineburg Salzburg Magdeburg Schnoidomlihl MUtnchen Munich Schwerin i.M. Monster Stettin Neustadt a.d.W. Stuttgart Nllrnberg-FlVrth Tilsit Oppeln Trier Osnabriick Troppau Plauen i.V. . Vienna Wien Posen Weimar Potsdam Wesermtinde Prag Prague 'Wilhelmshaven Regensburg TiTOrzburg Reiohenberg Zichonau Saarbrllcken  Part5 Fire Kroteotion Police Feuersphutzpolizoi  At the beginning of 1942 units of the Fire Protection Police were located ins Aachen Bremen Dortmund Augsburg --Breslau Dresden  Berlin ' Bromberg Duisburg Beuthen Chemnitz Dttsseldorf Bielefeld Cologne KBln Elbing Bochum Danzig Erfurt Brandonburg Darmstadt Essen Brau echwoig Dessau Flensburg   5893, CONFIDENTLIL  109 Paragraph 25. Public Order Police and the Elite Guard S3. APPENDIX Part 5 Frankfurt a.M. KBnigs.hiitte Oldenburg Frankfurt a.d.Oo Krofeld Osnabriick Gelsenkirchen Leipzig Plauon Gleiwitz Liegnitz Posen GBrlitz Linz Potsdam Gotenhafen Gdynia Litzmannstadt Lodz Regensburg Graz Ludwigshafen Remscheid Gubon L-Bbeck ' Rostock Hagen Magdeburg SaarbrUcken Halterstadt Mainz Schwerin Halle Mannheim So.snowitz Hamburg Momel Stettin Hannover MBlhauson Stuttgart Hindonburg CB. MUlheim Stralsund Innsbruck MBnchcn Munich Strass.burg Karlsruhe MBncheii-Gladbach Thorn Kassel MBnster Tilsit Kattpvvitz Neumtinstor Vienna YJien Kiel NBrnberg WescrmBndo Klagenfurt Oberhausen Wiesbaden KBnigsberg Pr Offenbach a.M. WiIhe1mshaven Wuppertal Zwickau f, OONFIDENTB.L  -110 - Paragraph 25. Publio Ordor Polioe and the-Elite Guard S S รยฐ APPENDIX Part 6 S3 Foot Regiments early 1941  X Existence No. of Military Corps Area  S3 Main Section  SS Section   Location and Other Data  a   txo S   Q TO   Units of a single 33-   Name Standarte or Regiment arc located often in several  cities. Thus the 10th S   -   Company or Sturm of the  4. 3rd Regt. .in Nttrnberg is  found in the nearby city  of Fttrth. Carl Laforco Munich  oo   4h 1  cn to   00-p   o oo  CO  1XVII 3 I  1 X VII S I Julius Schrock Munich 2 3 X Nftrnbergj 10 Co. -   Filrth i. .B. 4 5 6 X III 5P. III Eduard Felsen Berlin 1 X Friedrich Schlegel 8 9  lo X ZwoibrUcken  11 X XVII . D XXXI Planotta Vienna  12 X xr C Co. 6-Bad Salzdetfurth/ Hildoshoim  13 X V SVi Stuttgart  14  3.5 15 17 18Xi NE   16 X VI VI  20 X Fritz Weitzel  SI  22 X Co. 10-Rostock Lilibz/ Meokl. 23 24 X X N XIV Co. 10-Leer/East Friesland  25Xin Sp XII  26 X IV El XVIII Co. 4-Leuna 27X III p XII  28 X IV El XVIII Co. 1/Ros./ near Halle 29 X Kompten Allg&u 30XVI 31 32 33 34 35 X Ferndorf/Kreis Siegen 36 X XX v-Danzig3 Noustadt/W. Pr./ Contains some Baltic Germans   S3 Main Sectionst Northeast-NE Baltic-B Spree-Sp Elbe-El3 Southwest-SW West-W South-S Southeast-SE Fulda-Werra-M North Sea-N Central-C Rhino-R Main-Ma Danube D Alpenland-A Vistula-V Plartho-Yfa.  5893, CONFIDBNTIA.L  Ill  Paragraph 25. Public Order Polioo and the Elite. Guard SS.  APPENDIX  Part 6  37 38 39 46 41 42 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 S3 54 55 56 5 58  X X X.  X  X X X  X X X X X   x  TS T  sb 6l  62 63 64 65 66 67  eS -69  70 71 72 73 74  76 77 78 79 80  8i 82 83 84  SS  86 87 88 89 90  X X  X X X X X. X  tx X  X  X X  X X X  III  III  X  III X VI  VI  r  I  VI I .  VI III.-...  Ill  VI  X XXXI  Sp III Sp XXIII  c N XX  Sp XII N XIV  V  NE .HE . .. . ..  w. - HE -.- M.. .. Sp. Til  Sp III  w N XIV D XVII  i  -. lmJII - - .-  . . Fritz Schultz Berlin-Neiiikblln Berlin-Steglitz  . .1 ''.. i  Leipzig  Flerishurg LutzhBft  .i. Krems on the Danube  Landsborg/Warthe i   .-'it . -. ' r.Co. 7 -Bcroi J. Loeper .......I ..  .. .. - - - . .. '  .. EHinchen-Gladbach  1 u-.... SchSiiau/ScHwarzwaId  -.. .1. ...... 1...  .' ..'... . . ... - - Barlin-OberschBnweide Berlin-Britz mentioned also as SS-Sec. XXIII  Co. 5-Alsfeld in Oberhossen  Co. 12-Bludonz/Vorarlberg  Holzwobor Vienna  o-  LO  Erratum -S3 Rogimont 43s not yet identified.   5893, CONFIDENTIAL -112 -  Paragraph 25. Public Order Polios. and the Elite Guard SS. APPENDIX Part 6  1 92 33 34 X Fo.hnsdp.rf in S'imk Styria X Litzmannstadt 96 97 98 X Gr. Heilondorf/Ostsudoter 99 X .Brlinn 100 X IX M XXXVII  . 101 X Co. 11-FaIkonau/ .Egor Sudetonland 102 133 X Aussig/Sudetengau Co. 3 - Leitmeritz 104 X Co. 1 -Stroppau .Co. 2 -Troppau ios X I NE ioe rar X Brhnn Iglau-Leitmeritz rar X Prague-Stres chowitz rar X XXI \'io. Co. 11...-Posen Co. 1 116 Wiesengrund Kr .Jarotschin in 112 ITT 1.14 mr rrr 117 X Konitz/Danzig-W.Pr. Lis Ll3 X Marienwerder 120 121 122 123 124 X Neu-rOderberg/Upper Silesia or Kaaden/ Sudetengau, -113 CQMPIDENTB.L Paragraph 25. Public Order Police and the.Elite Guard SS APPENDIX Part 6 S3 Mounted Regiments SS-Reitorstandarten 1940 R1XI ME R2 X R3 R4 R5 X R6 X R7 X  R8 XVIW R9 XX NOf RIO Rll feis R13 Sl4 X R15 X R16 X X R18 R19 R20 X  Sf s L WftiTt ' p.  5893, . tv - A' I Wwvvvv t l-v Cv -Xh - - p y\  7 t i -  y V A/v  J' v I&vVn- y f l'XA/' jftyisy. p '-.t. fK ' t 's, DOCUMENT is THE PROPERTY OP HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY S GOVERNMENT   --TO BE KEPT Uhrn F R f OCK AN 5key. It Is requested that specI aI care may be taken te - enaui-e the secrecy of this document J.u-f42 154th Meeting 12th September. 1942 COPY WAR CABINET JOINT PLANNING STAFF MINUTES of the MEETING of the Joint Planning Staff held in the Cabinet War Room on 11TH SEPTEMBER 1942 at 10.30 aan.  PRESENT Brigadier G.M. Stewart War Office. in the Chair Air Commodore W. Elliot Captain A.W. Buzzard R.N. Air Ministry. Admiralty. Lt. Colonel P.C. Curtis Group Captain R.E. Vintras War Office for part of item l Air Ministry. for part of item 1 Captain C.C. Hughes Hallett R.N Admiralty for-part of Item l  THE FOLLOWING WERE ALSO PRESENT FOR PART OF ITEM 1. iajor General J.C. Haydon Commodore R.M. Ellis ir Marshal J.M Robb. Brigadier Sir H. Wernher   Combined Operations Headquarters SECRETARIAT Macor W.A. Howkins Major P.O.A. Davison  1 OPERATIONS ON THE CONTINENT -COMMAND AND PLANNING  Paper No. J.P. 42 73 S Draft DIRECTORS OF PLANS discussed v/ith representatives of  C.O.H.Q. the system of command and organisation of planning both operational and administrative for operations Roundup and 'Sledgehammer . The Meeting then went through the Draft Report paragraph by paragraph and  DIRECTORS OF PLANS.-   Instructed the Secretary to c- .ul 'te a re-draft summarising the various views e/roressed diring the discussion and to send copies to General Haydon for the concurrence of C.O.H.Q.  -1    326   is Tie frcpest op his dritai ic majus'i'y1 s novj . rM irj j - ToIf K T'NTrFi7Tdo7 AN D'KaY. ltl r qut jT aybit k n t  J- c E rti rtnuure the seareoy of this dteuirient.  jp i' 42 IteetirM iTgtli c&'ctcrr.Gc.T. 19 U-.. COPY NO.  AR CABI. lJ'i JOINT PLANNING-S'PAFy MTSUTlo nf the r NO of thn Join Pl nr-ing Staff held in the Cybfruu i.ar Rcorn cn 11TK 5 vL .D2Rs 1342 at 10 0 a .ni P -IESE iJT Bri ic.dier 3. \i. Htexvrt V/ar O Tice. I-'i the Ch/'ir iir Oojisnodore . .illtot C -r t.j l.n A. . iurd ] \ /iir Nir.ietry. Adrair -ilo.v It. Cvloiie1P.0 Curtig 3roup C.v.p .a'r P..F.. Vintrac 'Sur Cl fiae for pc rt of Lem 2 A. .p L inictiv-tfor part cf iterr. 1' Captain C.C. Holies j R.N.  AcMiralty. far par T cf IU rr. 1 XHIJ PC12.rv i G 'rj.RH C.SO K-lBoi KC i PAh J OF U WM 2.  3cr General J.C. Haydon Comncdorc R.i . Ellis iir Marshal J.M. Ro'fo ftri vdier Sir H. V/emhor.  0embinod 0peratior Hoctdou pt.ar IOP LARIAT Ma o.r .r.. Hov. 'cinJ Kajor P.O.A. Qviecn 3 . OP AfT.pr.ja c\ THE COKTIN ITT -AND  Paper Ho .T.P. 42 Y73 3 Draft BlRjDC'JOkS OF PLANS diacucsad '//ith reprssantatives cf C.C.H.O. the system of command and organisation of planning both operational and administrative for operations MRcurdup r and Sledgctiamer1 . The . .leetin. then went throuf. h the Draft Report p r graph by paragraph .ni  DIRNC'i 0R8 0 PLu S  instruc ed the Secretory to j1 te a ro-droft su onarising tUc vurimn viec.%a e roseoii d .rinr the discussion nr.d to send copies to General Haydon for the concurrence of C.C.II i -1, 2 MID-DHiB EAST -U.S MISSION AND Q.S.S. AGTIVITI'RFi  Paper No. J.P 42 803 S Draft DIRECTORS OP PLANS had before them the above Draft Report by the Strategical Planning Section and Instructed the Secretary to circulate it 1 amended in the light of the discussion over their signatures.  Subsequently circulated as J.P. 42 808 Cabinet War Room. 1 -2    8-XlI JCN AIO -rr v.-  Paper Ho. J. . ''. .03 S Draft  DIiiSD'JO S 01 PD Ur2 ha l bfl-'Dro tliata Uio ako a r r Report ny the 3trj tc rfil Plurj Sectier un.t In Jtlooted the Secretury to elrcali .te it 7 arionde tn tl.c light oJ tte dlucrapIon over tr.cir . nigrutures -arbc r rLv.i tly cirefill' tec es J.P '2 ---  Cabinet V.'ir loan. -2]