[, HISTORY  OP THE TRAINING SECT 0 N OP S.O.E. 1940 -1945. London Compiled by- September 1945. Major G.M. Forty., TABLE OF CONTENT S  PAGES.  INTRODUCTION. 1. CHAPTER I. Origin and Early History of the Training Section. 2-5.  CHAPTER II. Headquarters of the Training Section. 6-13.  1. General. 6   2. Function of the Training Section. 7 -10.  a- Administration. 7    b Preparation of syl labus and Training Instructions. 8-9.   c Liaison with other . Sections. 9 -10.  3. Organisation of the Training Section. 10 -13.  CHAPTER III. Preliminary Training. 14 -17.  1. The Purpose of Prelimin ary Training. 14 -15. -2. The Schools and their Organisation. 15 -16.  3. Training and Syllabus. 16 -17.  CHAPTER IV. The Students Assessment Board. 18 -22.  1. Reasons for its intro duction. 18 -19.  2. Organisation. 19 -20.  3. Method of Testing. 20 -21.  4. Extension of the S.A.B. 21  5. Disbandment of the S.A.B. 21 -22.  CHAPTER V. Para-Military Training. 23 -29. 1-. Organisation. 23 -25.  2. Syllabus and Training. 25 -29.  CHAPTER VI. Parachute Training. 30 -32.  CHAPTER VII. Agents Finishing Training.  Group B . 33 -40.  1. Organisation. 33 -35.  2. Syllabus and Training. 35   3. Security Training of Wireless Operators. 36   4. The 96-hour Scheme. 37 -38.  5. Post-Graduate Training. 38 -39.  6. Miscellaneous Subjects. 39 -40.  CHAPTER VIII. Training at S.T.S. 17.  Industrial Sabotage and Counter Scorching . 41 -45.  1. Organisation. 41 -42.  2. The Basic Cours-e. 42 -44.  3. Operational Courses. 44.  4. Other Training. 44 -45., PAGES.  CHAPTER IX. Propaganda Training. 46 -48.  1. Organisation. 46 -48.  2. Syllabus and method of instruction.  48  CHAPTER X. Holding and Operation Train ing. 49 56.  1. Organisation. 49 51.  2. Syllabus and Training. 51 53.  3. Training of Coup de Main parties. 53 54.  4. Training of enemy prisoners under the Bonzo scheme. 54 55.  5. Other Training. 55 56.  CHAPTER XI. Reception Committee Training. 57 -58.  CHAPTER XII. Miscellaneous Training. 59 -60.  1. Jedburgh Training. 59 -60.  2. S.O.E. Staff Courses. 60 -61.  3. Mines and Foreign Weapons. 61 -62.  4. Photography and Micro- Photography. 62 -64.  5. Carrier Pigeons. 64.  6. Lock-picking. 64 -65.  7. Home-Made Explosives. 65.  8. Training at M.E. 65. 66. CHAPTER XIII. Selection and Training of Officers for S.T.S. 67 -69.  1. Method of Selection. 67.  2. Qualifications. 67 -69.  3. Method of Training. 69.  CHAPTER XIV. Training Carried out by other Sections. 70 -73.  1. Technical Training . 70 -71.   a Signals Training. v 70.   b Pick-up Training. 71.   c piaval Training . 71.  2. Country Section Training. 71 -73.   a Polish Section Training.71.   b Czech Section Training. 72 -73.   c Norwegian Section Train ing. 73.  CHAPTER XV. Oversees Training Schools. 74 -76.  1. General. 74 -75.  2. S.T.S. 103. 75 -76.  3. Other Overseas S.T.S. 76.  .CHAPTER XVI. Assistance given to other Organisations and Services. 77 -78.  1. P.W.E. 77.  2. 'C Organisation. 77.  3. S.A.S. 77.  4. O.S.S. 77.  5. D.G.E.R. 77.  6. M.I.5. 78.  7. S.A.A.R.F. 78.  8. Miscellaneous. 78.  ii., PAGES  82.  CHAPTER XVII. Conclusion. 79  1. General Organisation. 79.  2. The Position of the Director of Training. 79 -80.  3. The Selection of ... Agents. 80.  4. The Segregation of stu dents. 80 -81.  5. Overseas Training Schools. 81 -82.  6. Supplies of enemy equip ment. 82.  7. Standard Charges. 82.  -215.   SUBJECT INDEX. 208  APPENDIC ES.  135   I. WAR ESTABLISHMENTS.   a S.T.S. H.Q. 84   b Preliminary Schools. 86 -87   c Students Assessment Board. 88 -89   d Group A. 90 -99   e S.T.S. 51. 100 -101.   f Group B. 102 -114   g S.T.S. 17. 116 -117   h S.T.S. 39. 118   i Operational Holding Schools. 120 -123   j S.T.S. 40. 124 -125   k M.E. 65 i October 1943. 126 -127   ii February 1945. 128 -129   iii July 1945. 130 -131   l S.T.S. 47. 132   m S.T.S.2 as a Prisoner of War Camp 134 -135  -159.   II. REPORTS.   a Preliminary Report 136 -137.   b Students Assessment Board. 138 -139.   c Para-Military 140 -141   d Parachute 142 -143   e Finishing Group B and S.T.S. 39 144   f Finishing S.T.S. 17 146   g Operational Holding Schools. 148 -149   h Reception Committee. 150 -152   i Final Certificate. 154   j kines and Foreign Weapons. 156 -157   k History Sheet. 158 -159  III. S-204YLLABUS.   a Preliminary Schools. 160 -168   b Students Assessment Board. 170   c Para-Military. 172   d Parachute. 174   e Agents Finishing. 176 -178   f Industrial Sabotage. 180 -181   g Propaganda 182 -185   h Operational Holding Schools. ISC -188   I Reception Corrmittee. 190 -194, PAGES  111 SYLLABUS Cont'd   j Jedburgh Training. 196 k S.O.E. Staff Course. 198 -200  l Mines Foreign Weapons and Snipers courses. 202 -204 IV. NUMBER OF STUDENTS TRAINED IN S.T.S. 206 V. CLASSIFICATION OF STUDENTS. ' 207 -/  t  V, ABBREVIATIONS USED IN FOOTNOTES  Documents are referred to by reference number and date. In addition the number of a file where the document is known to exist together with the name of the section holding the file is given wherever possible.  The following abbreviations are used - Archives -Normal files of the Archives Section. Handbook -Training Section contribution to the S.O.E. Handbook held by AD/Z Colonel MUNN . Training -Training Section Files.  Telegrams are assumed to be to or from LONDON unless otherwise stated and are referred to by number and date together with. In the case of out ward telegrams the name of the addressee and in the case of inward telegrams that of the sender., INTRODUCTION.  The Training Section of S.O.E. consisted of a headquarters section in London under the con trol of a Director of Training and also under his command a number of schools in England and Scotland. These schools carried out almost the whole of the training of S.O.E. agents for Europe the only ex ceptions being technical training carried out by the headquarters sections concerned and the train ing carried out by certain of the Country Sections for their own students. The training of S.O.E. agents carried out in the Middle and Far East was under the control of the local S.O.E. Commander though there was a varying degree of liaison with the Training Section in England.  The documentation of the early parts of the history is not so full as would have been desired owing to the absence of complete records. The compiler has therefore had to rely to a certain extent on his own memory but wherever possible undocumented sections have been checked by other officers with special knowledge of the particular subject or period. Acknowledgements are particu larly due to Mr. M.P. MURRAY to Colonel J.W. MUM and to Major D.P. HILTON for reading the history in draft and for their many valuable corrections and suggestions which have now been incorporated., CHAPTER I   ORIGIN AMD EARLY HISTURY OF THE TRAINING   SECTION   In July 1940 S.O.E. at that time known as S.O.2. was formed from Section D. It was se parated from the remainder of S.I.S. and placed under the control of the Minister of Economic War fare. Section D had its own training school at Station XVII later known as S.T.S. XVII and this school was retained by S.O.E. becoming the first Special Training School which was the name given to S.O.E. Training Establishments. Station XVII was located at Briclcondonbury Hertford and was under the command of Commander PETERS R.N. The instructional staff included Major later Briga dier G.A. HILL Mr. PHILBY Mr. BURGESS and Pro fessor PATERSON with Captain BARCROFT as Adjutant. The object of the school was to train men of dif ferent nationalities as instructors and recruiters who would be equipped and returned to their own countries in order to raise organisations to counter enemy interests and commit specific acts of sabo tage. In add-ition the establishment acted as a general purpose school and undertook the special operational training of raiding parties. The syllabus covered a variety of subjects ranging from political theory and. propaganda to demoli tions and weapon training including also the technique of secret service work. The early re cords of Station XVII are scanty and no detailed account is available of the training given there. There is however evidence that while the indi vidual abilities of the instructors were consider able there was a lack of co-ordination and disci pline. 1 .   At the time of the formation of S.O.E. Major later Colonel F.T. DAVIS was transferred s from M.I.R. Section of the War Office and became assistant to the then CD. He was particularly charged with the organisation of training and pre pared a paper 2 on the subject which formed the basis of all subsequent developments. In this paper Major DAVIS first of all postulated two types of activity for which training would be required   i.e. Long Term and Short Term. The Long Term policy was to entail the formation of bridgeheads in the countries in which S.O.E. was interested staffed by organisers mainly nationals of the country who would be charged with establishing a network of agents a system of communication and depots for equipment. The Short Term policy which was not held to be strictly within the clandestine province of S.O.E. was to be concerned with the carrying out of raids by suicide squads. The first essential was the training of organisers 1 Archives 2/160/28 Criticism of Training at Stn. XVII . No reference November 1940. 2 Archives 2/160/28 S.0.E.s Training . No reference 12.10.40., 3  which must precede any large scale operations to be followed as soon as possible by the training of a small pool of men for the suicide squads . Organisers would be sent first to Preliminary Schools also known as Depots where they would re ceive elementary training while undergoing their probationary period during which any undesirable or unsuitable elements would be removed. The next stage would be para-military training where they would be instructed in demolitions weapons minor tactics combined operations as well as the necessary intelligence methods forward reconnais sance topography field security and communica tions. It was also envisaged that parachute train ing should be carried out at this time. After the Paramilitary stage organisers would move on to Finishing Schools of which there would be one to each Country Section end where instruction would be given in security secret service methods propaganda the organisation of enemy forces and the local conditions in the occupied country con cerned. Students would also be held at Finishing Schools until they were needed for operations. Final instruction i.e. briefing would be given at Country Section flats in London. The train ing of suicide squads would be limited to a Paramilitary course after which they would be sent to a special holding camp until required.  As a result of Major DAVIS recommendations it was decided to transfer the M.I.R. training school in Scotland to S.O.JS. as the facilities available at Station XVII were clearly inadequate to meet the growing commitments. This school was  located at Arisaig House and was commanded at the time by Major later Colonel J.W. MUNN. Its function was to carry out the training of M.I.R. personnel in demolitions weapon training com bined operations forward reconnaissance and clandestine intelligence work 3 . Major DAVIS accompanied by Major later Colonel J.S. i WILSON who was his training Staff Officer visited the school at Arisaig and carried out a c reconnaissance of the area 4 . As a result of \ this reconnaissancef Inverie House Rhubana Lodge' and Meoble Lodge were requisitioned to serve as wings to Arisaig House which became the headquar ters of the Paramilitary group of schools later known as Group a with Major MUNN as Commandant of the group and Captain GODFREY as Chief Instruc tor. Ihile the Arisaig group was being formed \ Brigadier C.Mc. V. later Major General GUBBINS l joined the Organisation and assumed the responsir bility for training and operations with Major l TILSON as his staff officer for training. 'j Colonel BUCKLAND also joined the organisation at this time on the training staff of Brigadier GUBBINS with the particular responsibility of  3 Archives 2/160/28. Syllabus of S.T.C. Loch Ailort .No reference 16.9.40.  4 Training M/TR/1. Report on a Reconnaissance of the Arisaig Area. No reference 16.11.40., 4  acquiring the necessary accommodation and staff to  enable the original plan evolved by Major DAVlfe to  be brought into being. A-   Progress in obtaining staff and accommoda tion had been slow owing to difficulties with the War Office over requisitioning and war establish ments and as a result the first training carried out in December 1940 was somewhat makeshift. Two parties were involved sixteen Spaniards known as Sconces and five Italians known as Quins. One party received its preliminary training at Station XVII and the other in Scotland and they then changed places for their paramilitary training.  From the beginning of 1941 progress in the acquisition of additional accommodation for pre liminary finishing and holding schools became more rapid and by May of that year a number of each type of school were in existence. Some slight modifications had been made to the ori ginal plan in that it was decided to centralize the finishing schools under Training Section con trol and to make them separate to the holding schools which though allotted to Country Sec tions were also to be controlled by the Training Section. It is to be noted in this connection that Brigadier GUBBINS held the view that these holding schools should be a Country Section res ponsibility and only agreed to them being under the control of the Training Section for ease of administration. 5 .  In January 1941 five houses were acquired in the Beaulieu area Hampshire to serve as finishing schools. Major MUNN who had already been moved from Group A to Station XVII which was serving at this time as a finishing school was transferred in March 1941 to this newly formed group later known as Group B and ap pointed Commandant with the rank of Lieutenant Colonel. An additional house was also acquired in this area and was used as an elementary W/T training school until July 1941 6 when all  S.O.E. signal training was centralized at Grendon Hall. The house in the Beaulieu area then be came an additional finishing school. In addition to the schools already men tioned reference must be made to Briggens and wAudley End. Both were placed under the con trol of the Polish Section the former being used as a Finishing school and the latter as a holding school and despatch station. For fur ther information on these schools reference should be made to the Polish Section History 7 .  From this point onwards the History of the Special Training Schools can best be considered under their individual headings but first of all some consideration must be given to the Headquarters  5/Training M/TR/5. m/0R/41 of 17.12.40. 6 See Chapter XIV Training Carried out by other . .Sections . Section 1 a   7 See Chapter XIV Training Carried out by other Sections. Section 2 a ., , 6. CHAPTER II  THE HEADQUARTERS UF THE TRAINING SECTION.  1. GENERAL. The control of Special Training Schools placed first in the hands of Major DAVIES and at the end of 1940 in those of Brigadier GUBBINS was eventually with its growing responsibilities made the concern of a separate Training Section under a Director of Training. This section was known internally as MT Section and externally as S.T.S. H.Q. with its cover address of Room 98 Horse Guards though this latter designation and address also served all country establishments including those which siiere not under its control. The development which led up to the formation of this section influenced its policy and organisation and also had some bearing on its particular problems. This early history must therefore be considered in some detail before the functions of the section are examined.  The recommendation made by Major DAVIDS in his paper on Training 8 . was that there should be a Director of Training and Operations who would be responsible both for the training of personnel and for the mounting of operations. He would have under him two staffs to deal with these two sides of his activities. This recommendation was par tially implemented by the appointment of Brigadier GUBBINS as M 9 at the end of 1940. His staff for training consisted of Colonel BUCKLAND who was responsible for the general co-ordination of training matters and in particular for obtaining the necessary accommodation and personnel and Major WILSON who was responsible for the actual training. In addition to this Training Sub section MT Brigadier GUBBINS also had under his control the operations section MO and the Polish and Czech Country Sections MP and MX .  During the early part of 1941 the Training Subsection was gradually increased in size and in September 1941 when it had become difficult for Brigadier GUBBINS to give as much personal atten tion to training matters as before it was given a greater degree of autonomy and Lt.Col. MUNN was appointed as Director of Training replacing Colonel BUCKLAND who left in November 1941 as Head of ihe Section. He was promoted full Colonel in December of that year. Despite his title. Colonel MUNN was not however in the same position as other Direc tors in that he had no direct access to CD and no seat on the Council. Training was still under the nominal control of Brigadier GUBBINS who remained its spokesman with CD in the Council. This system had both advantages and disadvantages] it made possible a close co-ordination of Training and Opera tions more Country Sections having been grouped under Brigadier GUBBINS by the end of 1941 but it   8 See Chapter I page g.  9 Training. Circulars to schools l94l M/OR/54 16.lg.40., 7. meant that the Director of Training had no direct authority with these Country Sections. As long as Brigadier GUBBINS remained in charge this was no disadvantage but when in September 1943 he was appointed CD it left the Training Section in a weak position. Brigadier MOCKLER-PERRYMAN under whom the Training Section was now placed was as Head of the London Group primarily concerned with opera tions and Country Section matters and inevitably left far more than his predecessor to the Director of Training. He however had insufficient stand ing to lay down training policy to the Country Sec tions who were under no obligation to consult him in the planning of their operations thus making it extremely difficult to look ahead and prepare for future training commitments. 10  2. fPNCTlONS OF THE TRAINING SECTION. With certain exceptions which are dealt with separately ll the Training Section was respon sible for all training establishments and for the instruction given in them. These responsibili ties may be considered separately under the head ings of administration preparation of syllabus and training instructions and liaison with other sec tions.   a Administration.  i The recruitment of instructors. This is dealt with separately together with the question of qualifications 12  ii Students Administration. As soon as a recruit had been placed in training the Training Section assumed complete responsi bility for him except in matters affecting his actual employment e.g. preparation of cover story special continental dental treat ment where the Country Section made the necessary arrangements. All movements of students were arranged by the Training Sec tion as were medical and dental arrangements and in the case of students enlisted in the British Army routine administration and documentation. Students in schools were in accordance with normal Army practice under the command of the school commandant for all purposes.  iii Properties. The Training Section was responsible to the Properties Section for the maintenance in good condition of all houses occupied by schools and for the carry ing out of all provisions of agreements with owners.  iv Transport. The position was the same as with properties.  v Stores. As regards barrack and accommodatlon stores the Training Section was  10 Handbook. Recommendations.  11 See Chapter XIV Training Carried out by other Sections and Chapter XV Overseas Training Schools.  12 See Chapter XIII Selection of Officers for S.T.S., 8  merely responsible for checking the re quirements of school commandants who indented directly on Camberly Reception Depot. Where training stores were concerned the Training Section laid down scales for the various forms of training and made all necessary arrange ments with the Supply Section or other sections concerned e.g. Signals for certain W/T equipment for the availa bility of the equipment concerned.   vi Discipline. Commandants of Groups had the disciplinary powers of Commanding Officers of Units and Commandants of Schools those of De tachment Commanders 15 . Matters outside their jurisdiction were re ferred to the Director of Training who either dealt with the case himself re ferred it to the Country Section in the case of students or in the case of Courts Martial and similar matters referred it to the Legal Section for action as necessary. Courts of Inquiry were convened by the Director of Training.  vii Welfare. The Director of Train ing was responsible for the welfare of all troops under his Command and dealt per sonally with all cases referred to him by School Commandants.  b Preparation of Syllabus and Training Instruc tions. All syllabus of training were in the first place prepared by the Training Section but many of the subsequent developments arose out of sug gestions made by the Commandants and instructors of the schools. The Training Section remained however the central co-ordinator of all instruc tion keeping the schools informed of the latest developments in material and technique and con sidering any modifications proposed by School Commandants before their inclusion in the sylla bus. When a new school was opened or a new subject was to be included in the curriculum the Training Section issued a detailed syllabus with precis of the lectures and descriptions of exercises. The actual programme was the res ponsibility of the School Commandant . Schools were kept informed of subsequent developments in circulars or Training Instructions which were virtually amendments to syllabus. When the body of new information became such that a new syllabus was required this was prepared by the  Training Section after consultation with the Commandants concerned. The Training Section thus laid down and co-ordinated the policy of training as carried out in all schools and disseminated the latest information on Training   13 AGH/593 of 15.4.41. Repeated in R.O. Section II No. 87 of 10.1.45 as amended by R.O. Section II No. 89 of 13.1.45., 9. to all interested departments 14 . It should however be noted that in the case of Group B and S.T.S. 17 once the original policy had been laid down the actual syllabus was prepared by the Commandants and instructors of the schools the function of the Training Section being limi ted to ensuring that these syllabuses were in accordance with general policy and co-ordina ting them with those of the schools. Syllabus and Training Instructions were issued to all  schools for information irrespective of whether  the instructions were to be carried out in them  or not.   c Liaison with other sections. In order to prepare a curriculum to meet the needs of the Organisation it was essential for the Training Section to maintain the closest liaison with the technical sections and with the country sections.   i Liaison with the technical sections. This covered liaison with the Research and Intelligence Sections. In the case of the Research Section Training was kept informed of the projected new developments in equip ment and a representative attended all User Trials not only to obtain information on the performance of new devices but also to give the Research sections the benefit of practi cal experience in the schools. It was for example frequently found that a device which functioned perfectly when handled by techni cal officers was useless in the hands of low grade agents. By the presence of a Training Officer at trials it liras possible for such points to be considered before the device was put into production. As soon as the new equipment was ready for use instructions were issued to schools by the Training Sec tion who also prepared the written instruc tions for the Cell Booklets which were sent to the Field. In addition to assisting at User Trials the Training Section also carried out special trials of equipment in the schools when it was necessary to study performance over a period or under conditions approxima ting to those in the Field including hand ling by men vdio were actually going to the Field . Liaison with the Intelligence Sections had the purpose of obtaining general informa tion on conditions in the Field for use in Finishing Training at Group B and in opera tional training. Information was also ob tained on specific targets for the training of operational parties at S.T.S. 17 and in operational schools.   ii Liaison with the Country Sections. This had three purposes to obtain informa tion on the operations and missions for which  14 See in this connection Chapter XV Overseas Train ing Schools ., 1  training was required to supplement the in formation received from the Intelligence Sec tions on local conditions in Occupied Countries details of enemy methods etc. and to advise Country Sections on the training necessary for the achievement of their aims. Here rela tions were less satisfactory than might have been expected. The Country Sections were disinclined to divulge the details of missions so necessary to efficient training and they had a tendency to dictate the typesof train ing they wanted rather than to leave it to the Training Section to decide on the best method and duration of training for a given mission. This attitude appears to be in part attributable to the somewhat equivocal position of the Director of Training referred to above.  In July 1944 a belated attempt was made to bridge the gap between Training and Country Sections by the institution of a weekly.Train ing Meeting 15 presided over by the Director of Training and attended by representatives of the Country Sections the Signals Directorate the Stores Section and any other section like ly to be concerned in the items on the agenda. The idea was sound but the practical results were small as the Country Section represen tatives were in many cases too junior to speak authoritatively for their sections and had only the slightest knowledge of training mat ters. Had the meetings been instituted in the early and experimental days and attended by responsible Country Section officers it is likely that they would have had a consider able effect not only on the relations between the Training and Country Sections but on the status of the Director of Training and on the efficiency of instruction. These meetings were discontinued in September 1944.  3. ORGANISATION OF THE TRAINING SECTION. -fulNf.vnuo srs 1. Until the end of 1940 no Training Section proper ly speaking existed the necessary organisation and supervision being carried out by Major DAVIES and Major WILSON. When in December 1940 Major DAVIES left to take charge of the Research and Technical Sections Brigadier GUBBINS who assumed control of training in December 1940 appointed Colonel BUCKLAND to co-ordinate training matters and to concern himself particularly with the acquisition of houses and the selection and recruiting of instructors leaving Major WILSON to deal with questions of training pro per. By February of 1941 although most of the neces sary houses and staff had been acquired. It became necessary to increase the staff to deal with routine administration and Captain later Lt.Col. A.G. HOWE was appointed. This small section consisting of Colonel BUCKLAND MT Lt.Col. WILSON MZ and Cap tain HOWE MZ.l was really the nucleus from which   15 Training TR/A/1 ADE/1222 1.6.44., the Training Section grew and they carried out in embryo form all the functions which are summarised above.  By October 1941 the Section had been increased to nine officers five on the training side and four on the administrative all under the command of Colonel MUNN as Director. These additional officers had been appointed gradually during the year to meet in creasing pressure and consisted of Captain later Major D.P. HILTON who was made responsible for stu dents administration and movements a technical train  ing officer to carry out the work on syllabus and the liaison with research sections a signals officer  who was also commandant of the W/T school to re present that side of training which had not yet be come the responsibility of the Signals Directorate and three administrative officers to work under Major HOWE who in addition to the administration of schools under the Training Section was responsible for the administration of all S.T.S. Later in the year a  G.S.O.I was appointed for signals training but both signals officers were eventually transferred to the new signals section in 1942. Colonel BUCKLAND left the section in November 1941. Lt.Col. WILSON left the section in January 1942 to take command of the Norwegian section and was replaced by a G.S.O.II as Staff Officer to the Direc tor. In spite of considerable increases in staff the Training Section was now in the form in which it was to remain until its dissolution that is-to say it consisted of the Director and his personal Staff Officer a subsection concerned with syllabus and technical liaison a subsection for students' admin istration and movements and an administrative sub section. The number of officers involved fluctuated according to the amount of work but the organisation remained stable with the exception of the administra tive subsection.  As already stated. Major HOWE was responsible for the administration of establishments other than the S.T.S. under the Training Section and since he was thus concerned with matters outside the juris diction of the Director of Training it was decided in July 1942 to form a separate administrative sec tion MA under the direct command of Brigadier GUBBINS. The anomaly which was removed by this change was replaced by another in that administra tive instructions were now being issued by the MA section to units under the command of the Director of Training who for his part was no longer in a position to give orders to the administrative sec tion controlling stores and personnel for his schools. The situation gave rise to a certain amount of fric tion but this was avoided as far as possible by the Administrative Section working in consultation with and through the Director of Training and vice versa. When in the Autumn of 1943 an administrative officer was again appointed in the Training Section relations, 12. with the Administrative section improved. This new subsection later increased to two officers dealt primarily with questions of War Establish ments and of intakes and postings of officers. At the same time it collated demands from the schools and so eased the strain on the main ad ministrative section.  In November 1942 Colonel MUNN vacated the appointed of Director of Training which remained unfilled until January 1943 when Lt.Col. S.H.C. WOOLRYCH Comraandant Group B was appointed. During the ihterim period the work of the sec tion was carried on by Major D.P. HILTON work ing directly under Brigadier GUBBINS. Lt.Col. WOOLRYCH when he re-assumed command of Group B in May 1943 was replaced as Director by Lt.Col.  J.T. YOUNG promoted Colonel in July 1943 . In April 1943 Major D.P. HILTON relinquished the appointment of Staff Officer to the Director of Training to take up an appointment on the staff of Brigadier GUBBINS and later to become Com mandant of S.T.S. 26. His place was taken in the Training Section by Major G.M. FORTY. In the Autumn of 1943 the Section reached its maximum expansion totalling 12 officers. The additional officers to make up this total were an  R.A.M.C. psychiatrist to advise on questions of recruitment and disposal an adviser Major E.A. SYKES on unarmed combat and weapon training and an American officer attached from O.S.S. at the time of the integration of O.S.S. and the London Group. The organisation 16 of the section was as follows Director of Training.  G.S.0.2 Staff Officer to Director. .S.0.2 Technical subsection -syllabus   .S.0.3 technical liaison etc. 2 G.S.0.3 3 Students Administration and movements.  s General administration.  Staff Lieut  Major R.A.M.C.Psychiatrist.  Civilian Officer -Records.  Attached -   Major -Adviser on weapon training and un  armed combat.  Major - U.S. Army -Liaison officer.  Despite minor changes of personnel the section remained at the same strength until the Autumn of 1944 when with the disbandment of Group A a re duction was made though the organisation remained the same.  In December 1944 Colonel YOUNG was released from the Army and was replaced as Director of Train ing by Colonel F.V. SPOONER who held this appoint ment until the reconstitution of the section in July 1945. During this time further reductions had   16 See Appendix l a War Establishments, 13  been made in the strength of the section so that at the end it consisted of only four officers one of whom had been brought in at the beginning of 1945 to deal with questions of overseas training estab lishments which were then assuming a new importance   17 .  At the end of June 1945 all the training schools had been closed down with the exception of M.E. 65  18 which was retained as a general purpose school for any training commitments which might materialise and as a transit camp. To control this and a staff of Group B officers 19 a small Training Sec tion consisting of three officers was constituted under the Rest of the World Directorate.  \   l See Chapter XV Overseas Training Schools.   18 See Chapter XII Miscellaneous Training. Section 8.  19 See Chapter VII Agents Finishing Training  Group B ., 14. CHAPTER III.  PRELIMINARY TRAINING.  1. THE PURPOSE UF PRELIMINARY TRAINING. The need for preliminary training had been out lined in the original plan and schools to handle it had been established at the earliest possible date. The purpose of this training was two fold   a To give elementary military training and some sense of discipline to men recruited for work in the Field.  b To give Country Sections the opportunity of assessing more fully the suitability of the men they had selected and at the same time to allow for the elimination of unsuitable or un desirable elements before they had learnt any thing of the real work of S.O.E. Both of these functions were important. Men recruited by the Country Sections were commonly civilians or conscript soldiers of Allied armies with very little military background since the qualities and special knowledge required in an agent were frequently not those of the regular soldier. For such men training calculated to produce discipline and self-confidence with the cor ollary of good morale was essential from the outset. In addition whatever their future role they had to be taught the care and handling of arms and to be toughened physically. It is true that a small number of the recruits were trained soldiers and for them these considerations did not apply so much but even if its educational value was small for such men preliminary training did supply a cor porate S.O.E. existence into which recruits were immediately absorbed. This avoided as far as pos sible leaving men to their own devices and a feel ing of uncertainty after they had made the decision to volunteer.  The importance of the probationary period was equally great. Country sections recruiting of ficers had in most cases to make their decision as to whether to employ a man after one or at the best two or three interviews. Even when interviews were carried out by several officers as was the prac tice with some sections the possibility of a mis taken assessment of personality motive or aptitude was by no means removed while the chances of de tecting the enemy infiltrate were very small. During the few weeks spent In preliminary training the Country Section recruiting officer had however the opportunity to make further nquiries of the security services to visit and observe the man himself as well as to receive reports on him from the School Commandant the Security N.C.O., 15. accompanying the party and from his own Country Section Conducting officer. By the end of the preliminary period the Country Section was therefore in a reason able position to say whether or not a man was to be retained and if so for what type of work he was most suited. Those men who were unsuitable could be returned to civilian life or their units without any danger of them revealing anything of importance about  S.O.E. 20 . 2. THE SCHOOLS AND THEIR ORGMISATIOH. The following is a list of the Preliminary Schools  21 the dates of acquisition being shorn in each case together with the S.T.S. number. This numbering is the final one. During 1941 the numbering of all schools underwent many changes which it serves no useful purpose  to enumerate here S.T.S. 1 Brock Hall Flore 14.12.40 Northants. S.T.S. 2 Bellasis Box Hill Rd 3.2.44. Dorking Surrey. S.T.S. 3 Stodham Park 24.2.41 Liss Hants. S.T.S. 4 Winterfold 17.1.41 Cranleigh Surrey. S.T.S. 5 Wanborough Manor 25.1.41 Puttenham Guildford Surrey. S.T.S. 6 West Court Finchamp8.4.41 stead Wokingham Berks. In addition to the foregoing mention must be made of Inchmery House Beaulieu which was taken over on  5.2.41 as a Preliminary School for the Free French and was ultimately handed over to them entirely as a depot for the special parachute company. With the exception of Inchmery Preliminary Schools were not permanently allocated to specific nationalities since the fluctuation in numbers fre quently made this uneconomical. Members of dif ferent nationalities were however never allowed to meet and every effort was made to avoid changes un less they were absolutely necessary as it was clear ly beneficial to have a commandant and instructors who were used to and perhaps spoke the language of the students they had to handle 22   20 The importance of removing any undesirables at this stage and not later in training was constantly stressed by the Security Section. Men removed from training when they already had information on S.O.E. operations usually had to be sent to the Cooler officially I.S.R.B. Workshops Inverlair an establishment main tained by the Security Section for the safe custody of men likely to be dangerous to the organisation. The Period of detention in the Cooler was usually only for so long as the special knowIeHge of the detainees could jeopardise future operations. For further in formation on the Cooler reference should be made to the History of the Security Section. Also known as Depot Schools. Training -Circulars M/uR/126 31.1.41. Allocation of Schools to Nationalities., 16. Each school was formed as an Independant com mand the C.O. coming under the orders 'of the Director of Training. The Yiar Establishments of Preliminary Schools 25 were all alike allowing for a major in command assisted by a lieutenant quartermaster 1 lieutenant instructor and 4 N.C.O. assistant instructors. The commandants were on the whole elderly officers chosen more for their mature judgement than for their training ability and the actual instruction was mainly left to the junior officer and N.C.O.s though supervised by the commandant.  Contact between the commandants of schools and general co-ordination of training methods was as sisted by the monthly conference at headquarters which the commandants attended. This was started in 1941 and continued until the end of 1942. It was however felt that even with these meetings the commandants of Preliminary Schools were some what out of touch and that some more adequate supervision was required than could be given by the Director of Training or by headquarters staff officers. The post of Inspector of Schools was therefore created in August 1942 and Major F.V. SPOONER the Commandant of S.T.S. 45 was promoted to Lt.Col. to carry out these duties. Yftiile paying occasional visits to other schools he was primarily concerned with Preliminary and Holding   24 training. This arrangement persisted until January of 1945 when it was decided for ease of administra tion and greater efficiency of training to form the Preliminary and Holding schools into a Group with its headquarters in London known as Group C   25 of which Lt.Col. SPOONER became the first Commandant. The Preliminary schools were retained until June 1943 when they were replaced by a Students Assessment Board 26 based on the War Office Selection Boards. The schools themselves were then converted into Holding Schools.  3. TRAIH1NG AND SYLLABUS. The training carried out at Preliminary schools followed the lines envisaged in the original plan   27 and underwent little modofication. The syllabus 28 covered weapon training physical training and unarmed combat simple demolitions  with no referehce'Tb specifically S.O.E. stores map reading fieldcraft and elementary signalling. The intention was to give a sound grounding on which more advanced training could be based and  23 See Appendix 1 b .  24 See Chapter X. Holding and Operational Training page 50.  25 Ibid.  26 See Chapter IV The Students Assessment Board .  27J Archives 2/160/28. Unreferenced paper dated 26.10.40.  28 See Appendix III a, 17. to prepare the student both physically and mentally  for his further education and work in the Field. At the same time this simple military training not unlike a recruits course in the Army enabled an  opinion to be formed of the students capabilities  and his behaviour in a group. Reports were sub mitted by the commandant both during and at the end  of training which covered ability aptitude and  character as well as progress in the subjects taught   28a .  The syllabus had originally been based on a two week course but this was found too short for much benefit to be derived from instruction or for the character of the student to be properly studied and the course was increased in April 1941 to three weeks   29 and in March 194ki to four weeks 30 . During their preliminary training students were prevented from meeting other nationalities but they were allowed a certain amount of freedom in the form of visits to local towns for recreation. This was not only desirable from the point of view of morale but it also gave an opportunity since they were accompanied by a Field Security N.C.O. or by the Country Section Conducting Officer of judging their behaviour when confronted with the normal temp tations of every-day life. This would not have been possible had they lived an entirely cloistered existence.  Wo mention was made to the students during pre liminary training of the clandestine nature of the organisation 31 . When they were recruited they were led to believe that they were joining a form of Commando unit for raids on occupied territory and this illusion was fostered at the Preliminary Schools though it is not certain that the effort was always successful dither because Country Sec tion Recruiting Officers found it expedient to go further in their initial contacts than had been originally considered necessary or through con tact between students in different stages of train ing while on leave. A falling off in this res pect had certainly taken place as a reminder had to be issued in January 1943 32 . If the systen of the probationary period of preliminary training was to work it was however clear that the main tenance of this illusion was important.  The system of Preliminary Schools was ultimate ly abandoned for a variety of reasons but there is no doubt that given a proper co-operation be tween Country and Training sections and suitable staff in the Preliminary Schools it was a funda mentally sound system.   S   28a See Appendix II a .  29 Training Circulars M/OR/247.  30 Training M/TR/2 -JTfflM/662.  31 Training -Circulars M/OR/428  32 Training M/TR/2. SHCW/5. 18.1.43., 18. CHAPTER IV.  THH STUDENTS ASSESSIfeHT BUARD.  1. REASQMS FUR ITS INTRODUCTION. The system of preliminary training constituting a probationary period for the student dealt with in the previous chapter had many very real advan tages to which reference has already been made. By its very nature it was hoKsever a leisurely method and as the war progressed and the tempo increased it became necessary to find son more rapid system for the selection of agents but or which would not entail any greater risk of intro ducing undesirable elements into training. At the same time it had been noticed that an increa sing number of students were being rejected at late  stages in training entailing an added strain on i the security section and the MCoolerw together l with contingent problems of firiajr'ctxsposal with the-Home Office and M.I.5. These facts taken in conjunction with the need of Country Sections for increased numbers in the Field at a time when the supply of good material was rapidly diminish ing made a reconsideration of the problem impera tive. At the beginning of 1943 this question was fully examined by the newly appointed Director of Train ing Lt.Col. WOOLHICH in conjunction with the se curity and country sections and it was decided that the solution probably lay in the introduction of machinery of selection on the lines of the War Office Selection Boards for officers. In this way it would be possible in a few days by means of an exhaustive series of tests and interviews to assess the general suitability of recruits as well as their aptitude for particular types of work. This system would supplement without replacing the work of the Country Section recruiting Officers who would continue to make initial selections. It was realised that such a method while fulfilling the selective functions of the preliminary schools would not replace the training carried out there but the time saved would allow of an increase being made in the length of the paramilitary course 33 while still achieving a saving on the total time required for training.  These proposals were finalised and put forward by the Director of Training to Brigadier GUBBINS in March 1943 34 the additional argument being ad duced that by the introduction of such a system the preliminary schools would be made available for other training which with the increasing numbers of stu dents was a consideration of some importance. In April 1943 agreement was obtained to the plan 35 and arrangements were made for the establishment of the necessary Board to be known as the Students Assessment Board. Lt.Col. CHARLEY of the Security  733 See' Chapter v .' Paramilitary Training Section 2.  34 Training M/TR/5 MT/311. 25.3.43.  35 Archives 2/160/28 MCD/884. 5.4.43., 19. Section was appointed as the first President and S.T.S. 4 Winterfold was selected to house it with the new number of S.T.S. 7. The next two months were occu pied in consultations with the Directorate for the Selection of Personnel in the War Office with visits to War Office R.A.F. and Naval Boards with the assem bly of the necessary staff and with the installation of equipment at S.T.S. 7. The first party was hand led there in June 1945.  2. ORGANISATION. The S.A.B. was placed under the immediate con trol of the Director of Training and for administra tive purposes was treated as a normal S.T.S. with the President as C.O. A special War Establishment was drawn up for it 36 which in addition to the ne cessary administrative and maintenance staff allowed for a Lt.Col. commandant and president a major  2nd in command and deputy president two majors  R.A.M.C. psychiatrists a captain and a lieutenant R. A.M.C. psychologists three captains testing officers and three serjeants testers . Lt.Col. CHARLEY was replaced as commandant on 20th January 1944 by Lt.Col. G.A. BRO&N the deputy presi dent. Lt.Col. BROWN was in turn replaced by his deputy Major SINCLAIR who was promoted Lt.Col. and appointed commandant on 1st November 1944. The total student accommodation of S.T.S. 7 was 18 this number being divided into three parties of six for purposes of testing. Different nationali ties were handled simultaneously but each group was formed of members of one nationality or at least with a common language. When women were being tes ted they also were formed into a group as the tests varied slightly for them . Smaller numbers would be handled but effective testing became impossible with groups of less than three as it was then only possi ble to assess individual characteristics. Testing occupied four days and three parties of eighteen could be handled every fourteen days allowing a fort nightly break of 48 hours for the staff. Potential recruits were collected by the Country Sections into batches of a suitable size before sending them to the  S. A.B. When the recruits had undergone the full range of tests and interviews a final Board was held at which representatives of each side of the testing staff were present to put forward their opinion. A representative of the Country Section usually the Section Head or the recruiting officer was also present. A full discussion took place on each re cruit the country section representative stating the particular type of work or alternative types for which he was required and stating the Country Section view of the recruit in question. When all opinions had been heard the President gave his ru ling as to the suitability of the candidate together   36 See Appendix 1 c, 20. with his recommendation as to the particular work for which he was best suited. This ruling was shown in the official report 37 . The finding of the Presi dent was final and Country Sections who wished to employ a recruit who had been pronounced unsuitable had to obtain the sanction of Brigadier MOCKLER EERRYMSLN.  As a result of the introduction of the S.A.B. there was a marked decrease in the numbers of men rejected from training and most Country Sections ex pressed themselves well satisfied with the system. This satisfaction was not however unanimous and it was held by some that the S.A.B. constituted a bottleneck which was holding up operations and a number of applications were made for candidates to be excused passing through the S.A.B. 38 .  It is important to note that at the S.A.B. far more reference was allowed to the clandestine nature of S.O.E. than had been the case at Prelimin ary Schools. This was due first of all to the im possibility of making a' true assessment of motiva tion and character if the candidate did not knowr what he was volunteering for and secondly to the changed security conditions brought about by the widespread knowledge of the existence of clandestine organisations.  3. METHOD OF TESTING. The methods of the S.A.B. were based on those of the W.O.S.B. with the necessary modifications necessitated by the difference in the qualifications needed in an officer and an agent. The details of these methods are given separately 39 but are summarised briefly here. They may be grouped un der five headings   a Lav Interview's -Each candidate was inter viewed by the President or Deputy-President to obtain as much general information on him as possible and to enable the interviewing of ficer to form a general opinion.  b Psychiatric interviews -Each candidate was interviewed by a psychiatrist to dis cover whether he was of a stable and otherwise suitable personality and to obtain some light on those aspects of his character which had not been brought out in the lay interview.  c Psychological Tests of Intelligence powers of assimilation memory and of mechanical morse and instructional aptitudes. These were administered by the psychologists and serjeant testers.  d Practical Tests of iniative courage sta mina corporate spirit self reliance etc.  37 See Appendix fl b  38 For a further discussion of this matter see Chapter XVII. Conclusion .  39 See Appendix Ill b ., 21. carried out by the Military Testing Officers  who all had experience as instructors in S.T.S.  These tests were both indoor and outdoor.   e Completion of pro-formas giving all pos sible details of the candidates background. These were studied in relation to the results of the tests and interviews. In some cases such as when single students had to be tested urgently a modification of this tech nique was made the testing being limited to inter views and psychological tests. Though quite satis factory results were obtained in this way there was a greater element of doubt as to the validity of the final decision.  4. rXL NSICxf .TM. S...A.B. The technique of the S.A.B. was extended in a variety of ways.   a Pre-selection -1/ben large numbers of can didates were involved a technique of pre selection carried out by members of the staff of the S.A.B. was introduced. This pre-selec tion might be described as a process of Topping and Tailing since by the application of a limited number of tests it was possible in a very short time to sort out those candi dates who were clearly suitable and those who were clearly unsuitable leaving only the  doubtfuls to be put through the full S.A.B. course. This method was used with success with both the Polish and Free French sections.  b JEDBURGH Selection 40 The different type as well as the large numbers of officers and N.C.O.'s involved in the JEDBURGH scheme made it impossible to handle them at S.T.S. 7 and an additional and somewhat modified board known as No. 205 Selection Board 4l was es tablished temporarily at S.T.S. 3 Stodham Park in November 1943 under the command of Major SINCLAIR Deputy President of the S.A.B.  c Psychiatric Follow-up. Records were kept at S.T.S. 7 of the subsequent career of each successful candidate both in training and in the Field which made it possible to modify the tests where necessary. It was also of va lue when an agent as a result of his experi ence was in need of.psychiatric treatment which was carried out as far as possible by the psy chiatrists of the S.A.B. 5. DISBANDMENT OF THE S.A.B. The whole scope of training was drastically re duced in the Autumn of 1944 and the S.A.B. was   40 For an explanation of the JEDBURGH scheme see Chapter XII Section 1.  41 Training M/TR/l MT/2579 30.10.43., 22  closed down on 16th November of that year. One psychiatrist was retained together with a serjeant tester and attached to the Medical Section to deal with ary problems of selection or remedial treat ment that might be required. Normally the selec tion of agents after the disbandment of the Board was once more carried out entirely by Country Section Officers though without the assistance of the proba tionary period which they had had with the Preliminary Schools.  /, 23. CHAPTER V.  PARA-MILITARY TRAINING.  1. ORGAHISATIUN. Para-military Training except for certain excep tions dealt with elsewhere 42 was evolved and car ried out in the Arisaig Area later known as Group A. As already stated Group A was founded on and expanded from the M.I. Uing of the M.I.R. training schools at Invsrailort. The M.I. Wing was housed at Arisaig House and had a very small establishment consisting of Major MUNN Commandant Captain GODFREY Chief Instructor and about ten other ranks. Captain J. BUSH joined the staff as demolition instructor short ly after the school was transferred to S.O.E. in November 1940. From this small nucleus the whole of Group A was rapidly established. The Group as it was finally constituted consisted of the following schools of which the dates of opening are given in each case.  S.T.S. 21 Arisaig House Arisaig Taken over by Inverness-shire. S.O.E. from  Headquarters of the M.I.R. Novem Group . ber 1940. S.T.S. 22 Rhubana Lodge Morar 9.1.41. Inverness-shire. S.T.S.  2a Glasnacardoch Lodge 1.9.42. Mallaig Inverness-shire. S.T.S. 23 Meoble Lodge Morar 8.1.41 Inverness-shire. S.T.S. 23b Swordland Tarbet Bay 5.3.41. Morar Inverness-shire. S.T.S. 24a Inverie House Knoydart 25.11.40. Mallaig Inverness-shire. S.T.S. 24b Glaschoille Knoydart 6.11.41. Mallaig Inverness-shire. S.T.S. 25a Garramor House Morar 25.2.41. Inverness-shire. S.T.S. 25b Cammusdarach Morar 29.1.41. Inverness-shire. S.T.S. 25c Traigh House Morar 22.6.41. Inverness-shire. The Group was an independant unit under the command of a lieutenant colonel. Its War Es tablishment 43 underwent several modifications   42 See Chapter X. nHolding and Operational Training. Section 2.  43 See Appendix l d ., 24. but at its full development allowed in addi tion to the Commandant of the Area a major commandant and a lieutenant quartermaster for each S.T.S. as will be seen several houses could be combined to form one S.T.S. a major chief instructor a captain administrative officer and a captain R.A.M.C. medical of ficer for the Area together with 16 officer  instructors captains or subalterns 26 N.C.O. assistant instructors and the necessary ad ministrative staff. Making a maximum use  of all houses it was possible to accommodate  son 75 students though this number was only  rarely in residence.  Parties of different nationalities were segregated but no hard and fast allocation of houses to nationalities was made although as in the case of the preliminary schools continuity was always attempted. Students went to Group A direct from the Preliminary Schools and there began their specifically S.O.E. training. For security reasons the comparative freedom they had enjoyed in the Preliminary Schools was now curtailed and they were allowed no leave local or otherwise during their course.  All the schools were used for general para-military training .with the exception of Swordlands and Glasnacardoch. Swordlands was used for Naval Training 44 in connection with the Tarbet Base and continued to be so used by the Noraegians even after Naval Training had nomin ally ceased at Group A . Glasnacardoch was equipped and staffed as a Foreign Weapons School   45 and continued as such until its functions were taken over by S.T.S. 3 and later S.T.S. 47. Rhubana for a time was diverted from its normal uses and used as a W/T Preliminary School 46 partly to ease the strain on accommodation at S.T.S. 52 and partly to reduce the length of training required for W/T Operators by substi tuting for the full five week para-military course a combined training covering elementary W/T with weapon training and physical toughen ing training 47 . In the Autumn of 1944 the success of the invasion of Europe made it appear that fur ther training would be much reduced in scope and as a result it was decided to close down Group A. This was completed on 1.12.44. The subsequent course of the war was such that a demand still did exist for paramilitary train ing but such as was needed was thenceforth carried out in the Operational Holding Schools 48 .   44 See below page 28 and Chapter XIV Section 1  Naval Training .  45 See Chapter XII Section 3. Mines and Foreign Weapons.  46 See Chapter XIV Section 1. Signals Training .  47j Training TR/A/1 Minutes of Meeting to discuss the shortening of Training. Also ADE/1055/378. 250.1.43.   48 See Chapter X Holding and Operational Training., The Commandants of Group A are given below -   Major J. 1. MUNN.Nov. 1940 -Jan. 1941. Lt.Col. I. EVANS.Feb. 1941 -Oct. 1941. Lt.Col. P.C. ANDERSON.Oct. 1941 -May 1942 Lt.Col. J.T. YOUNG.May 1942 -Jan. 1943. Lt.Col. A.D. BALDEN.Jan. 1943 -April 1944. Lt.Col. T.H.H. GRAYSON.April 1944 -Aug. 1944. Lt.Col. F. INGHAM CLARKE....Aug. 1944 -Dec. 1944.  2. SYLLABUS AND TRAINING. Paramilitary training at Group A evolved directly from the syllabus of the M.I.R. Special Training Centre at Loch Ailort and of the M.I. Wing at Arisaig and was in consequence originally based on the idea of  military or semi-military bands operating in enemy  occupied territory. From this there was a gradual  evolution towards the training of agents saboteurs  and organisers in the practical aspects of the work  they would have to carry out or direct while living  a clandestine life. There was however never an  open admission to the student while undergoing para  military training that he was in any sense an agent  and the original intention of revealing this to him  only at the finishing stage was adhered to in theory  right up to the disbandment of Group A. In prac  tice it was found that the students either by in  telligent deduction or by direct information from  recruiting officers usually had some idea of the  work they were going to do.  As originally conceived the Para-military course was intended to last for three weeks but this was found inadequate and it was increased in 1942 to four weeks 49 and in 1943 after the closing of Preliminary Schools and the introduction of the S.A.B. to five weeks. The course had three main objects to teach the use of offensive weapons and special stores physical toughening and training in raid tactics both as individuals and in small groups this later including those subjects which  enable an approach to be made to the target by land or water.  The syllabus undervjent many modifications before reaching its final form 50 but the following list of main headings remained constant   a Physical training including preparatory exercises for parachu. x ting 51   b Silent killing.  c Weapon training including from 1942 on wards training in Foreign Weapons .  d Demolition training.   e Map reading and compass work.  f Fieldcraft.  g Appreciations planning and reports and orders. Training M/TR/2 JWM/662. 9.3.42.  See Appendix IIIc.  See Chapter VI Parachute Training    9, 26.  h Raid tactics.  i Elementary morse.  j Schemes and exercises designed to bring out the lessons taught in the foregoing subjects.  k Para-naval training and boatwork. Physical Training which was done out of doors in all weathers was designed to toughen a student and bring him to a high standard of physical fitness by the end of the course. Instructors were N.C.Os. of the Army Physical Training Corps. Emphasis was also placed on exercises to prepare students for the parachute course. The physical training culmina ted in an assault course run on a competitive basis involving the use of most of the methods of climb ing ropework etc. which had been taught.  Silent Killing. /hich was a more aggressive form of unarmed combat included the methods of de fence against knife and other attacks as well as the latest methods of attacking and killing sentries and other enemy troops silently. The main difficulty was always the inability to practise and see the results on a live person although holds blows and knife thrusts were practised with full fury on special dummies.  Weapon Training concentrated primarily on mak ing a student a good shot with an automatic pistol  .32 or .45 calibre and a Sten Carbine. A fea ture of this training was the method taught of in stinctive shooting i.e. without using the sights introduced by the late Major SYKES and which was later adopted in part by the Army. Stalk courses were set up to practice students in fast and in stinctive shooting and wooden houses to teach close quarter firing. As more and more weapons were sent to the Field such as silent weapons P.I.A.T. and Bren L.M.G.s the syllabus was expanded to in clude simple instruction in these also and also in the particular type of foreign weapons which might be met with on operations. Although initial training was done on an indoor range the bulk of the subsequent practices were outside on the stalk courses. Latterly each student was supplied with his own personal pistol which he kept throughout his training and so became thoroughly used to it.  Demolition Training covered the use and ap plication of explosives incendiaries and devices. Training was essentially practical and students were able to see for themselves the damage which could be done whilst the erection of mock-up targets which were destroyed on the exercises added a necessary touch of realism. The mak ing up of all types of charges was originally taught at Group A to give students sufficient general knowledge to solve any problem likely to be encountered in the Field. In 1943 however this wide general training was simplified by the, introduction of the Standard l lb. and 51b. charges   52 by which it was hoped to reduce the risk of failure through wrongly made up charges alvrays pre sent with unskilled men particularly those who had only had the training in the Field at second hand . This was regarded by some as a retrograde step but insuffic ' ' t available on which to make Map Reading and Compass Work was taught for although students might not have to make great use of it there was always the possibility of opera ting in strange country. In addition students were taught to memorise routes so as to be able to find their way by day or night without map or com pass also to draw a route with suitable remarks so that another person could follow it accurately. Instruction was also given in the use and reading of foreign maps covering most European countries.  Fieldcraft was the basis of the exercises held throughout the course and was designed primarily to train students to approach targets unnoticed for the purpose of reconnaissance and attack and gener ally to form a basis for guerilla tactics. All aspects of the subject were covered including use of cover and camouflage crawling stalking etc. To a certain degree Army methods were taught with some alterations but where these did not apply en tirely new formations and techniques were evolved. The rugged nature of the country which included areas of marshland together with the generally in clement weather made the practising of fieldcraft a physical as well as a mental test and lessons xmre driven home very vividly in actual practice.  Appreciations. Planning. Reports and orders are the basis of all successful operations and all students were trained in them. To simplify the appreciation a pro-forma was drawn up which ori ginally followed approximately the same lines as that used by the Army. Later it was found nec essary further to enlarge the pro-forma to cover additional factors which assisted the student and those which were habitually forgotten i.e. meteoro logical data and to emphasise the possible deduc tions which were used as a guide when arriving at the final conclusions. Whilst it was never an ticipated students could remember every detail of the pro-forma it certainly assisted in showing him how to arrive at a definite plan of operation and the points which should be considered. From this appreciation the student was taught to give operational orders and again a pro-forma was evolved as a guide. Students were also taught how to make out reports so as to give the maximum in formation with the minimum of redundant matter.  Raid Tactics included minor tactics based on subversive and guerilla warfare in which students   52 Training TR/A/l JTY/721. 23.9.43.  53 See also Chapter XVII Conclusion., 28. were trained to act as raiding parties including formations and movement across country followed by more detailed methods for ambushes attacks on in dividual houses and street fighting. Specific drills were devised for the various operations based generally on the Battle School technique with amend ments and the student was expected to memorise these drills. Lectures were always followed by practical application so that students were able to see for themselves and check in practice the points stressed in the lectures.  Elementary Morse was included in the original para-military course both to assess which students would make W/T operators and to give every student a working knowledge. A minimum of one period per day was devoted to this subject and an average speed of 8-10 w.p.m. sending and receiving was attained.  Schemes and Exercises were designed to illus trate all the lessons taught as well as to practige attacks on possible targets as on operations. Apart from those involving attacks on 'mock-up tar gets schemes were evolved for an attack on an actual railway yard by night the derailment of a train  using dummy charges but placing on the railway line and awaiting an actual train and the setting of an ambush using transport. The number of schemes varied but usually between 8 and 10 were carried out half of them by night. Realism was the key note of all exercises and schemes so far as practicable targets were erected to conform as near as possible to the actual thing live explosives and incendiaries were used when feasible and students were made to carry such stores and weapons as they would need in actual fact on operations. This realism was found essen tial to drive home points and on occasions to sti mulate that interest and attention to detail which would be so necessary on operations. Instructors always participated in every exercise and at least one accompanied the party as observer.  Finally some special mention must be made of Para-Naval training. The importance of training men in the use of small boats for landing operations as well as in attacks on shipping was greatly stressed in the early stages 54 and it was largely to han dle this type of work that S.T.S. 25b Swordlands was acquired together with a base at Tarbet Bay. In addition two auxiliary yachts 0RCA and RISOR together with numerous launches and dinghies and naval crews to man them were acquired early in 1941. The stress laid on this type of training appears however to have been unduly great and except in the case of Norwegian students whose method of entry to their country was commonly by sea no great demand was received from Country Sections. This is easily explained by the development of parachuting which became the normal method of transport for agents. Furthermore those who were still infiltrated or who  154 TrainingM/TR/3 -Unreferenced paper from  -to MZ and M of 23.2.41. entitled Proposals for  the development of Paramilitary Training., , 30. CHAPTER VI.  PARACHUTE TRAINING.  Parachute training for S.O.E. personnel was originally carried out by the R.A.F. at the Central Landing Establishment Ringway later known as No. 1 Parachute Training School. The number of stu dents to be handled soon made it necessary however that there should be a special S.O.E. establishment at least for their accommodation and ground train ing. 57 Furthermore the problems of parachute training for S.O.E. differed materially from those of Airborne Forces. In the first place the num bers were smaller and each individual became in con sequence of greater importance. Secondly the work which S.O.E. students were destined to carry out in the Field had a natural tendency to induce a high state of nervous tension. The last considera tion and in some ways the most important was that  S.O.E. students were of many nationalities. The only solution to these problems was to have a ground training establishment where special care could be given to the preparatory training of men who in many cases had come straight from a sedentary life before joining the Organisation and where individual atten tion could be given in order to deal with the differ ing temperaments and languages of the students. It appeared that only in this way could the necessary high confidence and morale be obtained. Subsequent events appear to have justified this opinion. The first step towards the establishment of the S.O.E. Ground Training School was taken in Feb ruary 1941 by the acquisition of Dunham House which was numbered S.T.S. 51. Major C.J. EDWARDS was appointed Commandant on 11th March 1941 and continued in that appointment until the final disbandment of the school in August 1945. In March 1941 Fulshaw' Hall S.T.S. 51b was acquired in order to increase / accommodation and to allow for a certain degree of segregation if required. It should be noted in this connection that the rigid principles of segregation by nationalities in force at the Preliminary and Para- Military Schools were at S.T.S. 51 almost entirely abandoned only being applied wiiere Country Sections specially requested it and in order to avoid meetings between students of S.O.E. and S.I.S. for whom S.O.E. carried out parachute training 58 when they were of the same nationality.  Training at S.T.S. 51 scarcely deviated from the original scheme evolved during the whole of its duration. Each course lasted from five to seven days according to weather. After receiving this ground training students carried out five descents later reduced to four in conformity with the practice of Airborne Forces . Facilities also existed for stu dents requiring additional refresher training to return  JstTTraining -S.T.S. 51 Unreferenced Minute from M to CD. 30.11.40.   58 See Chapter XVI Assistance Given to other Organisations and Services ., 31. to the school before departure to the Field.  In October 1942 training was introduced in the method of making parachute descents into water by means of a special water jumping suit. Such des cents were recommended for students who were not considered sufficiently fit to make a normal land ing and where a suitable stretch of water existed in the Field.  In 1943 the leg bag 59 was introduced and train ing in its use was given to all students except Nor wegians and Danes at the special request of the Re gional Head 60 who considered that the risk of in jury was too great 61 . This was not however borne out by the experience of Airborne Forces or at S.T.S. 51 62 .  Reception Committee training was carried out at  S.T.S. 51 until the summer of 1944 when all such training was centralised at the Reception Committee School established at Howbury Hall in June 1943  63 .  The total accommodation of S.T.S. 51 was nomin ally 50 students i.e. 25 in each house but this was increased to a maximum of 70 by accommodating permanent staff outside. This was however ex ceptional and could not be continued for long periods.  For the training of JEDBURGHS 64 where very large numbers were involved the qualifying num ber of descents was reduced to three and two par ties were handled per week. This system was also used for certain other heavy commitments dealt with in detail under the heading of Special Training.  The training of German prisoners for work in Germany which was started in July 1944 under the BUNZO scheme 65 necessitated their complete se gregation at S.T.S. 51 and the general reduction in the number of normal students at this time made it possible to allocate one or other of the houses at S.T.S. 51 entirely to BUNZO students. The subsequent increase in normal commitments and the very small number of BONZU students made this how ever an uneconomical system. When the further complication of PERIWIG B0NZ0S 66 who required segregation from normal BUNZUS occurred in the spring of 1945 an additional small house was ac quired in March and numbered S.T.S. 51c York House . This house which accommodated 10 students was used purely for B0NZ0S or PERIWIG B0NZ0S and was closed in June 1945. .  .51  All training cearsed at S.T.S. 51 on 1st July 1945 Fulshaw Hall/being closed on 6th June 1945 and Dunham House on 25th July.  \   59 For a full description see Training TR/k/1 P2/18/2 from O.C. S.T.S. 51. 18.11.44.  60 Training TR/A/4 Minutes of AD/E s Meeting 30.3.44.  61 Training TR/K/l SD/AD/738. 16.5.44'. 65 See Chapter X Holding  62 Training TR/K/1 P2/16/2 25.5.44. & Operation Training Sec. 4.  63 See Chapter XI Reception Training . 66 Ibid.  64 See under Chapter XII. Section 1 Jedburgh Training ., 32. During 1941 there was sorae discussion as to the extent and type of preliminary training which should be done at schools before the parachute training at S.T.S. 51. It was clear that the more early training that the students could re ceive the less the chance of accidents during actual parachute training. On the other hand too much early training might reduce the students interest during the course at S.T.S. 51 where the equipment was at that time somewhat primitive when delays due to weather might then have a bad effect on morale. It was finally agreed that pre-51 training at Preliminary and Paramilitary schools should be limited to specially suitable  P.T. exercises such as those to familiarise the student with the movements required for an actual parachute descent. Wo special apparatus would be used for this training., 33. CHAPTiJl 11.  AGENTS FINISHING TRAINING.  1. URGAMISATIUN. In accordance with the original project steps were taken at the end of 194U to find a suitable location for Finishing Schools. The plan 67 was to have a number of small houses grouped within convenient distance of a main headquarters so that small parties of students could be segregated by nationalities and at the same time receive instruc tion from specialist officers who at their central headquarters would have the facilities to make a thorough study of the problems of the agent tech nique. The first house to be acquired was The Rings Beaulieu Hants S.T.S. 3l in January 1941 and in the same month Harford House S.T.S. 32 The House on the Shore S.T.S. 33 Drokes S.T.S. 34 Vineyards S.T.S. 35 and Boarmans S.T.S. 36 were also acquired. The Rings was at first used both as the headquarters and to accommodate students but this was only a temporary measure and by March 1941 it had become the office block and students were no longer allowed access to it. About this time The House in the I'ood was acquired for officer accommodation. Subsequently four additional houses were acquired -Saltmarsh S.T.S. 32b in January 1942 Warren House S.T.S. 37a in March 1942 Blackbridge S.T.S. 32c in June 1942 and Clobb Gorse S.T.S. 37b in October 1942. Accommodation was thereby made available for some 80 students but this number was never reached as parties remained for the most part small usually from six to ten stu dents. The large number of houses was however re quired for purposes of segregation.  In March 1941 the staff of the Finishing Schools was composed of Lieut.Col. MOM as Commandant Major W00LRYCH as Chief Instructor Major HILL Mr. PHILBY and Professor PATTERSON from Station XVII and several younger officers from the Intelligence Corps. The constitution was under constant review as the work of SOE operators became clarified. During the summer of 1941 the work of the Group expanded rapidly as did the staff which by August numbered approximately fourteen officers.  By this time a proper War Establishment 68 had been drawn up for the Group at that time known as the Beaulieu Area but later as Group B which allowed in addition to the necessary permanent staff a Lieut. Colonel in command a major administrative officer and 2nd-in-eommand a major chief instructor a major assistant chief instructor 8 captain instructors and six subaltern instructors. No N.C.O.'s were allowed for on the instructional staff with the exception of   67 Training M/TR/4. Paper entitled Finishing Schools under cover of JSW/744 of 18.2.41.  68 See Appendix l f ., a P.T. instructor who also dealt with weapon train ing. Each student house was in charge of a lieuten ant subsequently captain administrative officer with its own permanent staff. The War Establishment of other ranks remained almost constant but that of officer instructors was increased until it reached 19 captains in 1944. At the same time as the num bers were raised subalterns were entirely elimina ted since as the war progressed it was found im possible to obtain officers with the necessary quali fications in this low rank. Even so at no time did Group B have its full complement of instructors ow ing to the difficulty of finding officers with in   -t-ai i i o-onz-.o f-Y.o-i y-h nr anci with the necessary language  Here it should be noted that language qualifications played a much larger part at Group B since the instruction was mainly con cerned with the inculcation in the mind of the stu  dent of certain fundamental ideas and with facts of organisation. In Para-military and in other more practical forms of training a great deal could be done with an interpreter and by demonstration.  No other changes of any importance were made in the administrative organisation of Group B be fore its final disbandment in June 1945. Some of the houses were it is true closed down in the Autumn of 1944 when it appeared that training was coming to an end but they were subsequently re opened with the exception of S.T.S. 35 and 37a.  In December 1944 Group B was divorced from the Training Section and placed under the direct control of Brigadier MOCKLER FERRYMAN and subse quently of CD./' Its history from then until July 1945 is not therefore included but it may be stated that its work continued on the lines established. The Group was disbanded in June 1945 but a small establishment of two majors and five captains was retained in London to prepare a handbook of agent technique and to deal with any training commitments which might arise. This modified Group B was brought back under the con trol of the reduced Training Section on 8th July 1945.  The following is a list of Commandants & Chief Instructors with the dates of their appointment   a Commandants Lt.Col. J.l. MUNN. March -September 1941  Lt.Col. S.H.C. WOOLKYCH. September 1941 -June  1945  For the period  during which he was  Director of Training  i.e. January to May 1943 the vacancy re mained unfilled .  69 See Chapter XIII The selection and training of officers for S.T.S., 35.  b Chief Instructors. Major S.H.C. WOOLRYCH March -September 1941 Major R.M. BRUOKRR September -Nov. 1941. Major C. SKILBfiCK November 1941 -July 1942. Major J. MIEDGWOOD July 1942 -June 1944. Major P. FOLLISS June 1944 2. THF SYLL/lBUS AND TRAINING. The curriculum of training at Group B was based on that of the M.I. Wing at Loch Ailort the Clandes tine training of S.T.S. 17 and the security training of the Intelligence Corps. By the early Summer of 1941 the syllabus had become stabilised and was di vided into five sections each with its corresponding departments and officers. The nA Department dealt with questions of agent technique clandestine life personal security clandestine organisation and me thods of communication and the recruitment and hand ling of agents. This was the fundamental section of training the other sections being complementary to it. The B Department was concerned entirely Filth the exercises necessary to bring homethe lessons of the theoretical training. The 'C ' Department dealt with the organisation of enemy forces both overt  Wehrmaeht and Police and clandestine i.e. Abwehr  S.D. and Gestapo . Attention was in the main con centrated on German organisations but a fair body of information was also built up on Italian and later Japanese methods. The nD Department dealt with propaganda. To begin with this department under Mr. PHILBY handled the training of all propaganda agents whom we sent to the field in collaboration with S.0.1. later P.ffi.iS. but a separata estab lishment was later set up to deal with advanced propaganda training 70 . Inspite of this the propaganda department at Beaulieu continued to func tion even when the advanced training had been re moved from it as it was considered that an elemen tary grounding in propaganda was of value to any agent as it enabled him to counteract the effects of German propaganda and also to understand the general scheme of Allied propaganda directed to wards his country and thereby to assist in main taining the morale of his fellov countrymen. The n.En Department dealt with codes and secret inks giving to begin with only general instruction but later establishing code conventions for all students. This organisation continued with only minor modifications during the whole existence of Group  B. However while few superficial changes were made in the framework the subject matter of the lectures given was constantly undergoing review in the light of reports from the Field reports from  70 See Chapter IX Propaganda Training ., 56. other intelligence sources information obtained  from enemy press and radio and from the comments  and criticisms of Country Section Officers. As  soon as agents began to be exfiltrated the practice was established of such returned agents visiting  Group B and giving an account of their experiences  and undergoing detailed interrogation by represen  tatives of the various departments. In this way  it was possible to check and correct the original  teaching based as it was largely on the practice  of the first world war and of theoretical reason  ing.  The definitive edition of the syllabus 71 was prepared in 1944 incorporating all the les sons learned since the creation of the Group. The material in it is presented in its basic form from which it is possible with an adequate supply of intelligence to make the necessary adaptation for any given country. This system was found the most practical at Group B where instructors specialised in a country or countries maintaining detailed files on local conditions etc. and com piled their own modified lectures from the basic syllabus to meet the needs of individual parties.  The duration of the course was three weeks except in the case of British headquarters officers and other non-operational personnel when it was reduced to 10-14 days. As will be seen by re ference to the syllabus a great proportion of the time was given over to exercises both indoor and outdoor. It was found that theoretical instruc tion was of little value unless it could be applied in practice by the student and that furthermore it was unsatisfactory to impose an entirely seden tary life on students who had for the past two months been living an active physical existence.  3. S1CUR1TY TEAINIMG UF blRBLBSS OPERATORS. It was the original practice for only the com paratively high grade organiser agents to be sent to Group B but it was found as early as the Autumn of 1941 that a considerable danger existed to the Or ganisation in the Field by the ignorance on security matters of other types of personnel sent from this country in particular lf/T Operators who were fre quently young and irresponsible. To remedy this defect an instructor from Group B was attached to the W/T Training School S.T.S. 52 then situated at Grendon where an abbreviated Group B course was given to the W/T Operators. This lasted fourteen days but the time was not exclusively devoted to Group B subjects wireless training continuing in order that there should be no loss of sending speed. This system continued until the spring of 1942 when it was decided that the mixture of W/T training and Group B subjects tended to confuse the students and arrangements were made for all ffi/T students to attend   71 See Appendix Ille, 37. a shortened course at Group B after the eighth week of their wireless training. The duration of this course was ten days later extended to 14 days . They continued however to receive their code train ing at S.T.S. 5 .  4. TFLb 96-HOUR SCfhi.MB. The main development in the early part of 1942 was the introduction of the 96 hour scheme. This evolved from a reconnaissance exercise which had been carried out from the M.I. Wing at Loch Ailort which was designed to test the student in the sub jects in which he had been instructed and to make it possible to assess his behaviour when faced with problems comparable to those he would meet in the Field. In the early form of the 96 hour scheme a group of students was sent to an area remote from the school where they were required to carry out the reconnaissance of a target usually fairly ex tensive such as a railway network a port etc. in order to decide on the most vulnerable point and the best method of attack. At the same time they were required to organise themselves by clandestine methods and carry out the orders of the student ap pointed as leader who prepared the plan of attack. Different individuals were usually located in wide ly spaced parts of the same town or in different towns in order to make it necessary for the method of clandestine communication to be practised.  Many of these schemes provided excellent results but in general it was found that too much time was spent in travelling and in maintaining contact and that too much responsibility was placed on the leader so that insufficient practice was obtained by the re mainder of the party. A new and standardised scheme was therefore evolved in which students were sent out as individuals and were given a limited reconnaissance task. The student was now required however to face a number of hazards in his reaction to which it womLd be possible to judge his ability. These hazards con sisted of police intervention including trailing arrest and interrogation and the contacting and re cruiting of a previously unknown individual. Hazards similar to these had been introduced in the long range schemes run for W/T Operators from S.T.S. 52 in con junction with their security course but the personnel required were in that case supplied by the Organisa tion in the form of F.S.P. Now the Civil Police and civilian residents in towns were incorporated and this necessitated a very close liaison with M.I.5.  Even in the case of the earlier schemes it had always been the practice to notify the R.S.L.O.s through the S.O.E. Security Section of what wras taking place in their area but now that active co operation was introduced a more intimate contact was required. This was obtained by two methods. First by the representation of the Commandant of, 38. Group B on the M.I.5 Panel which met at frequent  intervals to discuss questions concerning liaison between secret organisations and the security ser vice. The second method was by personal contact between the Commandant of Group B and the R.S.L.O.s whom he visited and to whom he explained in detail his requirements. This personal contact was fur  ther strengthened by parties of R.S.L.O.s attending  courses at Group B.  The success and value of the 96-hour scheme were borne out by results and also by the fact that the principles were adopted by the C Organisation in their training of intelligence agents. It is however to be recorded that considerable opposition to the scheme was encountered from certain Country Sections on the grounds that exposure to the hazards of arrest and interrogation was liable to lower the confidence of students at a time when they were in a highly strung condition 72 . The opinion of the Training Section had however always been that it was better for any weaknesses in-a potential agent to be shown up in this country rather than in the Field where his failure would probably jeopardise the safety of the organisation as well as the lives of fellow agents. With few exceptions it was found that the better types of student reacted favourably to the scheme and on their return from their missions stated that the practice they had received had been of value in giving them confidence in the Field.  5. POST-GRADUATE TRAINING. It was realised early in the existence of Group B that training a man or woman to lead a clandestine life was more a question of inculcating a habit of mind than one of teaching facts. To do this in a three weeks course except in the case of students of great aptitude and intelligence was virtually im possible and various attempts were made to find a solution to the problem.  The first proposal was to introduce a post graduate course at Group B which the student would attend after his 96-hour scheme. Such a course would normally be of 14 days duration and would be concerned with the general application of the prin ciples of the basic course to the particular mission of the student and with revision of the subjects in which he appeared weakest.  Approval was obtained in 1943 for the institu tion of these courses 73 but only two were held. The reasons for this are obscure but it would seom that country sections were unwilling to allow the necessary time.  Ultimately the Post-Graduate courses were dropped and the continuation training was carried out in the Operational Holding Schools 74 . This proved a   72 Training TR/0/9a. DR/1169.  73 Training TR/b/1 1944 Minutes of CDs weekly meeting. 14.7.43.  74 See Chapter X Holding and Operational Training'., 39. more practical solution since students normally went  to these schools while waiting to go to the Field and their constitution was such that it wad possible not only to revise the Group B training in the light  of specific missions but also in conjunction with what the student had learned at other schools.  6. MISCELLANEOUS SUBJECTS. Incorporated in the syllabus of Group B were cer tain subjects which had no direct bearing on the par ticular form of training given there in particular training in railway sabotage and reception committee work. Railway sabotage was introduced at Group B at its inception i.e. before it had been decided to make  S.T.S. 17 an advanced sabotage school 75 . The syllabus 76 covered all forms of attack on track and rolling stock both with and without the use of explosives. Railway training continued at Group B long after this form of training had been much more fully developed at S.T.S. 17 and owing to the lack of close liaison between the two schools discrepancies of teaching arose 77 . Railway sabotage was ac cordingly deleted from the syllabus at the end of 1942 and was henceforth dealt with only at para military schools and S.T.S. 17 with of course re vision at Operational Holding Schools. The position with regard to Reception Committee Training was similar. To start with the practical aspects of the reception of. stores by air was handled at S.T.S. 51 while the question of the selection of dropping grounds and the clandestine organisation of Reception Committees was dealt with at Group B. Unfortunately the Instructors at Group B had little if any practical experience of dropping operations and serious discrepancies arose. It was on account of this that the Reception Committee school 78 was established in 1943 and instruction in this type of work eliminated from the syllabus of Group B except for general discussion of the security aspect of the organisation of bodies of men for this purpose.  Another subject which came to be included in the syllabus with more justice was that of the organisa tion of foreign workers. Early in 1942 the large numbers of workers being deported or induced to leave occupied territories for Germany made it clear that a considerable potential resistance force was being built up In that country. In order to avail our selves of this opportunity it was necessary to train special agents who could either enter Germany as foreign workers and there organise their compatriots or who could give instruction to workers who were known to be leaving. Group B was accordingly called upon to prepare a suitable syllabus of train ing and since the type of work was largely concerned   75 Training -Railway Training DL/OR/53 13.12.40.  76 Ibid RIG/OR/422' undated.  77 Ibid. JWM/157. 15.4.41.  78 See Chapter XI 'Reception Training.1, with indoctrination and instruction in passive methods the lectures in question were made part of the propaganda course. Although this course was in being from 1942 until the defeat of Ger many it is to be noted that little use was made  of it by Country Sections.  Other miscellaneous subjects taught at Group B were Photography the handling of Carrier Pigeons and Lock Picking but since these were not exclu sively dealt with at Group B they are dealt with separately. 79 .   79 See Chapter XII. 'Miscellaneous Training', CHAPTER VIII.  TRAINING AT S.T.S. 17 - INDUSTRIAL SABOTAGE AMD COUNTER scorchingTT  1. ORGANISATION. The early history of S.T.S. 17 originally known as Station XVII has already been covered 80 and there is no need to retrace it here. The school continued to work as a General Purpose school un til Group B was established in 1941 when the clan destine agents' training was transferred to Group B the elementary training to the Preliminary schools and Group A and S.T.S. 17 while still available for the specialised training of coup-de-main parties became the industrial sabotage school. This title does not however give a full idea of the scope of its activities which covered in addition to the tech nique of attacking common machinery that of putting out of action railways dock Installations shipping telecommunications and also more specifically mili tary targets such as aircraft submarines radiolo cation installations and in general of anything which could be described as a mechanical target.  The first commandant of S.T.S. 17 in. its new role was Major CLARKE but he was replaced in October 1941 by Major G.T. RHEAM who remained commandant of the school until its final disbandment in June 1945 be ing promoted Lt.Col. in February 1943.  The War Establishment of the school 81 allowed in additibn to the Commandant for one major chief instructor five captain instructors and two lieu tenant instructors subsequently upgraded to cap- tains vacancies . In. addition there was a cap tain administrative officer and four N.C.O. instruc tors together with the necessary permanent staff. This establishment by no means excessive for the work to be done was unfortunately never filled ow ing to the difficulty of finding officers with the necessary engineering qualifications 82 particu larly later in the war. Dhring 1943 and 1944 when the school was working to capacity the instructor strength dropped as low as three officers entail ing very considerable strain and making impossible the carrying out of much of the necessary research work or the preparation of handbooks. Despite these difficulties it can with confidence be said that never was there any falling off in the quality of instruction.  The school could accommodate some thirty five students in all and this number was reached regu larly during 1943 and 1944 when in addition to Basic Courses 83 the Home-Made Explosives Course   84 was also accommodated at S.T.S. 17 The average  80 See Chapter I 'Origin and early history of the Training Section.'   81 See Appendix 1 g .  82 See Chapter XIII 'Selection of Officers'.  S3 See below page 42.  84 See Chapter XII Section 5. 'Home-made Explosives Course.', 42  number of students on the Basic Course rose from 10 in 1942 to 18 in 1943 and reached its maximum of 28 in 1944 . Conditions with such large numbers in residence were however extremely cramped.  The programme was so arranged that one Basic Course of three weeks duration took place every four weeks. This allowed for operational and specialist   85 courses to be handled in the free week since with the shortage of instructors it proved almost impossible to run Basic and Specialist Courses simul taneously. No segregation of students was made at S.T.S. 17 and courses were normally of mixed nationalities. This had certain practical disadvantages such as necessitating the use of several interpreters simul taneously but on balance it would seem that these were counteracted by the advantage derived from the free interplay of ideas between men of different temperaments training for different but closely related work and united by a common aim. No particular difficulties arose at the school from this practice and the commandant expressed himself strongly in favour of it.  S.T.S. 17 was closed in July 1945 but on the instructions of CD 86 most of the equipment was transferred to M.15. 65 87 under the charge of Major BLACKDBN the Chief Instructor. This was an interim measure to avoid dispersing the specialist personnel and. the equipment until such time as a per manent Industrial Sabotage School should be estab lished 88 . 2. THE BASIC CUDRSE. When S.T.S. 17 ceased to be a general purpose school and became the Industrial Sabotage school in the Spring of 1941 comparatively little was known of the potentialities of co-ordinated and scienti fically planned attacks on industry. Industrial Sabotage was regarded as one of the many types of activity to be indulged in by clandestine agents and it was only later largely due to the work carried out at S.T.S. 17 that the potentially de cisive character of industrial sabotage was generally realised.  In these circumstances it is natural that the early courses were of an ad hoc nature 89 . However by October 1941 the principle had been es tablished that there was to be a standard course and its duration was fixed at 12 toys 90 . This basic course was again lengthened in September 1942 91 this time to three weeks at which it remained until the dissolution of the school.  See below page 44. Training -TR/J/l GMF/7078/J.1. 11.5.45. See Chapter XII Section 7. M.E. 65 . Training TR/j/l Recommendations by the O.C.  S.T.S. 17 dated 5.6.45 for the establishment of a Permanent Industrial Sabotage School  under cover of GMF/7116.J.1 of 6.6.45 . Training-Industrial Sabotage Syllabus MZ/80. 31.7.41. Ibid. JTO1/112 29J. 0.41.   91 Ibid MT/1429 145 . 42., 45. For sabotage of indsutry to be effective that is to stop production it was clear that the agents concerned in addition to their ability to make up and place charges required a knowledge of the com plex organisation of modern industry 92 . At the same time it was equally clear that the average agent sent to S.T.S. 17 was in no way an industrial expert and the problem was therefore how to give a layman in three weeks the necessary engineering outlook to enable him to apply his demolition knowledge intelli gently and effectively. It was recognised that for non-technical personnel the ability to locate the vital parts of the major industries and to iden tify the vital machinery was more difficult to ac quire than a knowledge of the enemy s industrial economy.  When the syllabus 93 of the Basic Course was drawn up the main emphasis was placed on these points. In addition it covered the organisation of industry the sabotage both with and without explosives of common machinery electric power transport telecommunications shipping canals and special types of works such as oil refineries and tanneries. In order to familiarise the stud ents with the type of target they would encounter a number of visits to factories were made during the course and in addition to the theoretical training practical exercises were carried out by day and by night. As the war progressed and the emphasis changed instruction was also included in the Basic Course on attacks on military targets grounded air craft ammunition dumps artillery A.F.V. s Radar installations etc. and a period was introduced dealing with the prevention of enemy demolitions and the safeguarding of vital equipment for the Allies.  To cover such a wide range of Technical subjects as this in the basic course of three weeks presen ted a problem of peculiar difficulty Satisfac tory results were however obtained by reducing the instruction to fundamental principles which were largely based on the time it would take the enemy to repair or replace a particular piece of equip ment. The instruction itself was concentrated rather on recognition features than on how and why a particular plant or machine works and in the me thods of attack training was as far as possible standardised and alternative methods eliminated.  in this connection it should be noted that the O.C.  S.T.S. 17 was instrumental in bringing about the in troduction of the standard charge which was adopted in all training schools 94 . The material on which the syllabus of the basic course is founded is set out in extenso in the  Industrial Demolitions Handbook prepared at S.T.S.  17. This handbook of which a volume is devoted to each type of target constitutes the standard work on the subject.  92. Handbook Report on the development of Industrial Sabotage Training at S.T.S. 17 August 1944.   93 See Appendix Ill f  94 See Chapter V Para-military Training., 44  3. UP RATIOtlAL COURSES. In addition to the Basic Course Special short operational courses were run at S.T.S. 17 for coup de main 95 parties who were going to carry out one specific operation and for men who were going to specialise in one type of target. Ideally the men attending such courses should previously have attended the Basic Course but this was not always possible. Since these special courses lasted only two to seven days an even more rigorous applica tion of the principle of the Basic Course was neces sary cutting out all reference to details other than those which had direct reference to the task and practising the men thoroughly on targets similar to the ones they were to attack in the field using models of the actual made-up charges with which they .were to be supplied.  4. OTIl E TRAINING. In addition to Industrial Sabotage training instruction was also carried out at S.T.S. 17 in Counter Scorching i.e. the prevention of demoli tions by a retreating enemy . Counter Sabotage i.e. the prevention of enemy sabotage behind our own lines and also in safe breaking. The first of these types of training was given to normal S.O.E. agents who were to be concerned with harassing tac tics in the Field and was largely based on the me thods taught in the Basic Course. For this pur pose it was necessary to give instruction in enemy demolition methods and for a long time great dif ficulty was encountered in obtaining the necessary information and specimens. The training in enemy demolitions given at S.T.S. 17 was more concerned with the methods of application than with the ac tual devices used which were primarily dealt with at the school of enemy weapons and demolition equip ment . 96 .  Counter Sabotage training was carried out for personnel of the army counter sabotage organisations at the request of Lt.Col. ROTHSCHILD of M.I.5 after the invasion of France when enemy sabotage attempts were causing some anxiety 97 . These courses were quite separate from the normal S.O.E. courses and lasted 12 days. 98 . In them a general pic ture was given of sabotage methods and a detailed study was made not only of the methods of neutrali sing the devices used by the enemy but also of the general measures to be taken for the safeguarding of large installations or factories. A number of visits were made during this course to the type of installa tion of particular interest to the students attending it i.e. docks power stations etc .  Training in safe breaking and lock picking was carried out for officers of T Force .whose role was to seize documents of value left behind by the enemy.   95 See Chapter X Holding and Operational Training .  96 See Chapter XII Section 3 Foreign Vieapons .  97 Training TR/J/1 GR/2105 27.11.44. Report to CD by C.C. STS 17 on discussions with Lt.Col.ROTHSCHILD.  98 Training TR/J/8 MT/5655. 15.12.44. Programme of Counter-Sabotage Course., 45. This training only began after D-day. Courses n.ere of 12 days duration and students were taught various methods of opening safes with explosives and by the use of oxy-acetylene cutters as well as the princi ples of lock picking. A detailed report 99 on  the methods of safe-breaking was made by the officer responsible for organising and running this course. Major D.E.F. GREEN.  Handbook., CHAPTER IX  PROPAGANDA TRAINING.  1. URGA jTSATION. The operation of propaganda agents was not strictly within the charter of S.O.E. As early as .1940 when S.O.E. and P.U.E. originally S.O.w were formed it was however agreed that S.O.E. which had the facilities for training and des patch would undertake these functions for agents recruited and briefed by P.W.35. The assistance of S.O.E. was to cease once the agent was in the Field apart from maintaining for him a W/T link.  The first training of propaganda agents was carried out at S.T.S. 17 by Mr. PHILBY and Pro fessor PATERSON who were subsequently transferred to Beaulieu with the opening of Group B in April 1941. The number of students to be handled as well as the liaison with P.W..E. grew rapidly and Mr. HACKETT who had previously been employed by Section D was taken on as an additional instruc  tor.   a  By September 1941 it became apparent that propaganda training was falling into two distinct categories the training of propaganda specialists for P.W.E. and the elementary education of S.O.E. agents in propaganda methods. The latter was clear ly best carried out at Group B as it was closely allied to the general instruction in clandestine activities. The training of the specialist on the other hand demanded the close co-operation of the P.W.E. Country Sections and also facilities for those giving the instruction to keep in toiich with the day to day policy being evolved by P.W.E. It was therefore decided that a house should be obtained near to the P.W.E. country headquarters at Woburn where this training could be carried out.  In October of 1941 a suitable house was found and Captain HACKETT was transferred to it from Group B becoming its first commandant. The house was run as a civilian establishment with no military personnel and the numbers hand led were always small the ideal being to treat students as individuals since the instruction was largely concerned With broadening and develop ing their own ideas on political and social matters as well as in teaching them the technique of pres enting those ideas in the most telling form and of assessing public opinion under clandestine con ditions.  The staff at this school known as S.T.P was increased auring 1942 by two officers Mr. later Major JvADDICOR and Captain later Major GALLIE, 47. and the scope of training was enlarged to cover all the processes of reproduction required in the dissernination of propaganda including printing block making photography and radio. Schemes were run in conjunction with the Ministry of Home Security and M.I.5 involving the assessment of public opinion in this country and visits were arranged to the BBC transmitting stations and studios.  In July 1943 the Propaganda School was brought into line with other training establishments by placing it on a military basis vi/ith a War Estab lishment lOO that allowed a major commandant and chief instructor three captain instructors and one subaltern as administrative officer together with one serjeant assistant instructor. The school was at the same time transferred to Wall Hall Aldenham Herts and was given the number S.T.S. 39. Shortly after the transfer. Major HACKETT was moved to London to act as liaison officer between S.O.E. and P.W.E. on policy questions affecting the two organisations and was replaced as commandant by Major GALLIE. After the move the staff was brought up to established strength by the engagement of three additional instructors and by the commissioning into the F.A.N.Y.s of a civilian secretary. Mr. WADDICOR was commissioned at this time and in the Autumn of 1943 left S.T.S. 39 to take command with the rank of captain of a school of micro-photography established at Beaulieu lOl .  There was no possibility of segregating nationa lities at S.T.S. 39 and here particularly the in terchange of ideas between men of different intellec tual cultural and political backgrounds was found beneficial. The length of training varied between ten days and four weeks depending on the missions and capabilities of the men concerned and some ten students could be accommodated in all. Since instruction was on an individual basis the fact that this number was rarely in residence was an ad vantage. As it was the numbers to be trained dropped consistently up to the early part of 1944 when a certain number of men were trained for the P.ffif.D. of S.H.A.E.F. 102 . This commitment really lay outside the scope of S.T.S. 39 which was however able to make a valuable contribution to their training before P.W.D. ultimately set up its own training establishment. By July 1944 there was no further justification for retaining  S.T.S. 39 and it was closed in July 1944 103 srsonnel being dispersed to P.K.E. Arrangements were made for  P.W.E. to undertake any clandestine propaganda training commitments which might arise 105 .  100 See Appendix 1 h .  101 See Chapter Xll Section 4. Photography & Micro-Photography.  lOg Training TR/M/l MT1/4176/M.1. 4.5.44.  103 Ibid ADE/289 6.5.44.  104 Ibid ADE/390 12.5.44. see also JWIi/50/262 of 10.5.44 and JWH/L/590 of 26.9.44.  105 For a more detailed account of the setting up of Propaganda Training see Training TR/M/l STP-STS 39 - A Summary of S.O.E.'s activities in Propaganda Train ing by Major J.W. HACKETT 28.12.44., 48  2. THii SYLLABUS AMD METHODS UF1 IMSTRUCT10N. Owing to the need for flexibility and the in dividual nature of the instruction a fixed syllabus of lectures v/as never formulated. The course did however divide itself broadly into four main sec tions   a Printing duplicating and other means of mechanical reproduction.  b The principles and practice of propaganda writing.  c Political information and propaganda direc tives.  d Propaganda reconnaissance or opinion research. For the purpose of giving Country Sections a clearer idea of the potentialities and limitations of Propaganda Training a General Syllabus 106 for a Basic Three-Tn/eeks Course was drawn up but this was never applied rigidly.  The fundamental principle of Propaganda Train ing was learning by doing and right from the beginning the student was encouraged to express his own ideas and develop them himself with only the minimum necessary assistance from instructors either to stimulate the ideas to supply background know ledge for their full expression or the technical equipment to express them in the most telling form.  In addition to this theoretical fork a large number of practical exercises were introduced with the co-operation of M.I.5. the Home Office and the  B.B.C. Some of these were similar to the Group B 96 -hour schemes in that students had to live a clandestine existence but their task was that of opinion research on some predetermined question among a given section of the population. Other exercises were concerned with the use to be made of local printers radio stations and other means of disseminating propaganda. r'   l06 See Appendix Ill g, 49. CHAPTER X.  HULDING AIM OPHRATIUNAL TRAIMIHG.  1. ORGANISATION. The original scheme drawn up in 1940 provided for eight Holding Schools to supply accommodation for trained students awaiting operations segre gated by nationalities. Two of these were diver ted to other uses and by June of 1941 six Holding Schools had been established S.T.S. 41 Fawley Court S.T.S. 42 Thame Park S.T.S. 43 Audley End  S.T.S. 44 Gumley Hall S.T.S. 45 Hatherop Castle S.T.S. 46 Chichley. Permanent allocations of these to nationalities were not made as fluctua ting numbers made it necessary to allocate accom modation in the most economical manner. Audley End was the only exception to this rule and was taken over by the Polish Section for final train ing and despatch though it continued to be ad ministered by the Training Section until the middle of 1943 107 . In October 1941 an ad ditional small house Northampton was acquired and numbered S.T.S. 45a. In December 1941 Thame Park was transferred to the Signal Direc torate as a W/T School and renumbered S.T.S. 52 and on 9th July 1942 Fawley Court was also handed over to the Signals Directorate and renumbered S.T.S. 54a. Three additional Holding Schools were acquired during 1942 Water Eaton Manor in April Gorse Hill in May and Roughwood Park in August. The Holding Schools were now renumbered in part and the list was as set out below until their final closing - S.T.S. 41 Gumley Hall Market Harborough Leics. S.T.S. 42 Roughwood Park Chalfont St. Giles Bucks. S.T.S. 43 Audley End House Audley End Saffron Walden Essex. S.T.S. 44 Gorse Hill Whitley Godaiming Surrey. S.T.S. 45 Hatherop Castle Fairford Glos. S -T.S. 49 Forthampton House Northampton Nr. Tewkesbury Glos. S.T.S. 50 Water Eaton Manor Oxford. The War Establishment for Holding Schools 108 allowed for a major commandant and chief instructor 2 officer instructors originally captains or subal terns but subsequently all were made captains 109 4 N.C.0. assistant instructors and a lieutenant adjutant and quartermaster together with the neces sary permanent staff. The original commandants had been for the most part elderly officers of the same type as the Preliminary School commandants but when these were replaced by younger officers it became the normal practice to fill the administrative vacancv with an additional instructor.  107 See Chapter XIV Training Carried out by other Sections .  Section 2 a   108 See Appendix l i  109 Training -TR/B/1 1944 GFM/8197/B.1. 17.2.85., 50. In the beginning Holding Schools came under the direct control of the Training Section at Head quarters as did Preliminary Schools but in August 1942 it was felt that some closer supervision of their functions was required than could be given by the Director of Training in person and Major  F.V. SPOONER the Commandant of S.T.S. 45 was pro moted lieutenant colonel and appointed Inspector of Schools. Though particularly concerned with Pre liminary and Holding Schools he also kept in to\ich i/yith the other schools to maintain a proper co ordination. In January of 1943 the Preliminary and Holding Schools were formed into a group known as Group C for ease of administration and were placed under the Command of Lt.Col. SPOONER who be came the first Commandant of Group C with his Head quarters in London but distinct from the Training Section proper 110 . To begin with his staff con sisted of one staff captain and one civilian secre tary but this was inadequate and the staff of Group C was eventually increased to 1 GS0.2 1 GS0.3 one staff serjeant and one corporal clerk in ad dition to 2 civilian secretaries. No separate war establishment was drawn up the necessary va cancies being created on the war establishment of S.T.S. H.Q. 111 . Lt.Col. SPOONER was temporarily replaced as  O.C. Group C by Lt.Col. T.H. GRAYSON during his period of command at M.E. 65 112 from January to April 1944. On the appointment of Lt.Col. SPOONER as Director of Training in December 1944 Lt.Col. GRAYSON resumed command of Group C until July 1945 when it was disbanded. Holding Schools were for a long time regarded purely as pools in which trained agents could be held in conditions of comparative security and in which undue deterioration of their physical condi tion could be avoided. This attitude towards the Holding School adopted as it was by many Country Sections discouraged commandants from the display of initiative in evolving training programmes and as a result while simple revisionary work was car ried out the students tended for the most part to stagnate. The Country Sections apparently not appreciating that this state of affairs was due to their own -indi-ffer-ence generally underestimated the potential value of Holding Schools and kept their students in London where they were easily available rather than send them to the country where they ap peared to do nothing useful and were difficult of access. The only exception was S.T.S. 45 where a comprehensive and graduated programme of training was put into practice due mainly to the energy and foresight of Major SPOONER and to the co-operative  attitude of the Danish Country Section. The prin- ciple adopted in the case of Danish students was that the whole of their training was based on S.T.S. 45. Prom there they went to the specialised courses in other schools but returned each time to consolidate the knowledge they had gained and to integrate it   110 Training -Circulars DCD0/360. 15.1.43.  111 See Appendix 1 a .  112 See Chapter XII Section 1. 'Jedburgh Training.', into their general plan of training which was based on their probable mission. For this system to work a close liaison was needed between the commandant of the training school and the country section and in addition both the commandant and instructors of the Holding School needed a sound knowledge of the sub  jects taught in other establishments. These con ditions were fortunately fulfilled at S.T.S. 45.  Constant efforts were made by the Training Sec tion to improve the training at the Holding Schools in co-operation with Country Sections but the ex treme pressure under which both the Training Section and the Country Sections were operating made these efforts less successful than could have been wished. However during 1942 and 1943 most of the rather elderly commandants who had originally been recruited were replaced by younger officers with training ex perience.  Finally -when the S.A.B. replaced the Preliminary Schools in June 1943 the opportunity was taken to re-organise the Holding Schools which were re-named Operational Holding Schools in order to emphasise their true role of co-ordinating students' training in relation to their projected operations. The houses made vacant by the closing of Preliminary Schools were added to the numbers of Operational Holding Schools with the exception of Winterfold which was renumbered  S.T.S. 7 and became the home of the S.A.B. While a certain measure of success was achieved little real co-operation was reached with the Coun try Sections who persisted in withdrawing their stu dents at the shortest notice making the preparation of a training programme extremely difficult or even in keeping them entirely in London. The high degree of success achieved in Danish training was never equalled but considerable improvement did neverthe less come from the reorganisation and valuable train ing was done at the Operational Holding Schools though it never proved possible to emulate the ex ample of S.T.S. 45 and use them as the permanent base for the whole training of parties of students.  Anderson Manor which had previously been the base for the small scale raiding force was also acquired ip June 1943 and became S.T.S. 47.  After the closing of Croup A in the autumn of 1943j the Operational Holding Schools became vir tually general purpose training establishments handling both para-military and operational hold ing commitments until they were finally closed in the summer of 1945 May -July .  2. SYLLABUS AND TRAINING. . No standard syllabus could be laid down for operational holding schools as the training had., 52. by definition to derive from the operational role of the student and the previous instruction he had received. It may therefore be said that the syl labus of Operational Holding Schools was the sum of the syllabus of all other schools- but instruc tion was not necessarily given to all students in all subjects. The system generally adopted in com piling a syllabus was for the O.C. Group C to study the students previous reports in conjunction with the application for training by the Country Section which stated the nature of the proposed mission and the estimated time for which the stu dent would be available. A syllabus would then be drawn up paying particular attention to those subjects in which the student had shown himself to be weak and in those of particular relevance to the operation. On the basis of this directive the school commandant would compile his programme   113 .  An important development in Operational Hold ing Training was the introduction of Group C Con tinuation Schemes . 114 These were based on the Group B 96 hour scheme but were designed to carry the student a stage further in his develop ment. In the Group B scheme the student was an individual with certain individual tasks to carry out and purely personal hazards to meet. In the Group C Continuation Schemes students were now called upon to bring all their knowledge into play and to act as a group in the Field being charged with the carrying out of a complete mission such as an attack on a vulnerable point of a dock-yard. At the same time the co-operation of the Police and dealings with civilian contacts were included and where the operational plan of the students involved W/T contact their W/T operator or operators ac companied them on the exercise ll5 . As a com plement to these schemes exercises in the various aspects of clandestine life were continuously car ried out in the Operational Holding Schools. Where a sufficient number of students was available the usual plan was to make one section of the stu dents act as a counter-espionage service while the remainder formed a clandestine organisation and were required to carry out some-subversive act without being detected and while carrying on their normal daily routine 116 .  After the disbandment of Group A in the autumn of 1944 the Operational Holding Schools undertook all paramilitary training in addition to their nor mal work. To start with training was carried out on the original para-military syllabus but it was soon apparent that the type of activity for which students were now being trained demanded a new ap proach and greater flexibility. Fnere hitherto it had been a matter of the training of either organisers agents or coup de main parties it was now a question of training men to lead and organise   113 See Appendix Ill h .  114 Training -TR/H/6. MT/4428/R.4. 2.6.44.  115 Handbook. Appendix 6.  116 Ibid. Appendix 7. & Training M/TR/5 T/2 a /2183.  9.12. 42., 55. guerilla activities in the occupied territories at the time of or shortly before invasion. This in particular applied to the French maquis. The men undertaking these missions were for the most part Allied officers' who already had a fair military background and were in some cases regular sol diers. T e problem therefore was to train these men in the forms of warfare and the types of equip ment peculiar to irregular forces and to fit them  to instruct their compatriots in the special de vices and demolition equipment being supplied by  S.O.E. Owing to the rapidity of the development of the military situation and also in part to the lack of planning this training had to be carried out in the minimum of time in some cases in as little as seven days and more usually in two or three weeks. The syllabus of training therefore depended on what the particular party of students already knew and concentrated on those elements which were strange to them. This usually meant that the main emphasis was placed on demolitions special weapons such as the Bazooka and FIAT enemy equipment and the tac tics of guerilla warfare. Much of this would nor mally have been dealt with in Operational Holding School training and would not have been considered part of a Para-military course but was included at this stage in order to save time. The training of British personnel to act as liaison officers with Allied guerilla forces was a separate commitment and was handled at M.E. 65 Milton Hall 117 .  After the summer of 1944 and the virtual clear ance of France and Belgium of the enemy the need for Para-military training again decreased and only ad hoc courses were carried out for small parties or individuals being sent on special missions. Train ing for such special students was generally limited to demolition and weapon training.  The need for a study of guerilla warfare as op posed to the activitiae of agents was however stressed by CD 118 and some work was done on the basis of the experience of S.O.E. officers in France Greece Yugoslavia and other countries. Little was how ever achieved in the way of final conclusions and the question is still under discussion at the time of writing.  3. TRAINING OF CQUP-DE-MA1N PARTIES. In addition to the training normally carried out in Operational Holding Schools there was also the operational training of Coup-de-Main parties and in this lay perhaps one of the outstanding successes of Group C. The earliest operations of the Coup-de- Main type such as Josephine A and B had been moun ted at a time when the distinction between training and operations had not been strongly marked. The   117 See Chapter XII ''Miscellaneous Training Section 1.  118 CD/7588. 12.1.45., 54. training of personnel had taken place at S.T.S. 17 and had been supervised directly from London. This procedure was quite adequate at the time particu  larly as there were not large numbers of these spe  cial operations to be dealt with. In 1942 how  ever the French Section instituted a policy of widespread coup-de-main activities and a procedure  for the mounting of operations and the training of  operatives was laid down by Brigadier MOCKLER-   FERRYMAN 119 . This in brief states that when  a coup-de-main operation was projected a meeting would be called of representatives of the Country  Section the London Group and of the Technical  Intelligence and Training Sections. At this meeting the general plan would be evolved and the  type of equipment required decided. A repre  sentative of Air Liaison section was also present  to advise on the feasibility of air despatch to  the particular area. The preparation of the. op eration order and the training of the selected  personnel was made the responsibility of the O.C.  Group C who also advised the Country Section on the suitability of personnel for the operation. A school in Group C was made available to hold a  pool of coup-de-main type students and to give  them general training. Once briefed for their  operation they were trained in its particular  requirements and carried out exercises based on  the actual operation using mock ups of the  actual charges and devices. These exercises were  carried out on targets approximating as closely as  possible to those in the Field and in many cases  included the dropping of the teams from aircraft.  This method of preparing coup-de-main opera tions was justified by its results and in particu lar SCULLION Operation may be cited as an example of operations prepared in this way.  One of the main reasons for the success of the plan lay in the close unity between training and operations the students feeling themselves to be personally.involved in the preparation of the op eration orders and in a position to offer criticism and suggestions both before and after exercises based on it.  4. TRAINING OF BNEIVIY PRISONERS UNDER THJ BUNZU scheme. In June 1944 the German Directorate made the decision to employ a number of German Prisoners with anti-Nazi sympathies for work in Germany. To han dle this special commitment S.T.S. 2 was converted 119a 'into a Prisoner of War Camp with the approval of  D.P.W. War Office and was used as an interrogation and selection centre for prisoners who had been diverted from the main prisoner of war stream by a preliminary sifting at Kempton Park. Those prisoners who were found suitable known as BUNZOS were transferred from S.T.S. 2 to other schools in Group C specially allocated to them for preliminary and final training. The syllabus was essentially  119 Training TR/A/1 ADE/368 4.8.43.  119a See Appendix I m ., \  j I  55. the same as that given to normal agents with the exception that since they were not for security reasons allowed to attend other schools those parts of the Group B and S.T.S. 17 syllabus which were applicable to their missions were given in Group C. For parachute training they were however sent to S.T.S. 51 under special arrange ments 120 .  A further school in Group C S.T.S. 5 was subsequently made available to the German Directorate as a Holding School for returned BONZO agents pending a decision as to their re-employment.  Early in 1945 a deception plan was evolved by the German Directorate in connection with the main BONZO scheme under the code name of PERIi'IG. For the training of the special students for this scheme who had to be completely segregated from all other BONZOS as well as from other students. Station XIX  Gardener's End Ardeley Stevenage Herts. was taken over from the Polish Section and incorporated in Group C as S.T.S. 19. Only a very small number of PERIWIG students were handled and the school was closed in May 1945.  In all 51 BONZO students and 7 -PERIWIG BONZOS were trained.  5. OTHER TRAINING. In addition to the normal subjects of the syl labus certain other training was carried out in or organised by. Operational Holding Schools.   a Street Fighting. Students who required training specifically in the methods of street fighting were normally sent to the London Dis trict School at Battersea. In addition at the end of 1944 facilities were obtained for the use of a street fighting area in Southampton to be used by S.T.S. for that purpose but it was ultimately only used for sniping instruc tion owing to the difficulties in obtaining demonstration squads.  b Driving of motor vehicles. There was a sporadic demand for this training particularly from the Belgian Section but considerable dif ficulties were encountered in obtaining suitable training vehicles. It was ruled by Brigadier MOCKLER-FERRYMAN that any training needed would be carried out by arrangement with local civilian driving schools 121 but this was found to present difficulties as regards security. The case was therefore resubmitted for an allocation of training vehicles but this was refused 122 . It was not until JEDBURGH training had come to an end in the latter part of 1944 that it was possible Cha ter'Tl-'TPaTachilte-Training page Sir   121 Training -TR/A/l JTY/2346. 14.10.43.  122 Ibid. ADE/1059/209. 12.11.43., 56  to take over training cars and motor cycles which had been included on the vehicle establishment of  M.E. 65 and make use of them for training in Operational Holding Schools.  c Training in the handling of carrier pigeons in the manufacture of home-made explosives in foreign weapons and in lock-picking while all carried out in Operational Holding Schools also took place else where and are therefore dealt with separately l 3 .   i  123 See Chapter XII Miscellaneous Training., CHAPTER XI.  RECEPTIUN COMMITTEE TRAINING.  As already recorded the need was felt for a central school to teach Reception Committee methods and this need became particularly acute with the wide spread introduction of the S-Phone and Eureka 124 . Numerous instances of failure of this equipment had been reported from the Field and an examination of these reputed failures showed that the cause lay ra ther in the incompetence of ground operators than in any fault of the equipment.  In September 1943 Howbury Hall Nr. Waterend Beds. was taken over and became the Reception Com mittee School 125 with the number of S.T.S. 40. It formed part of Group C. The War Establishment   126 allowed a staff consisting of a major comman dant two officer instructors dealing with the or ganisation of reception committees and the use of the S-Phone one R.A.F. Officer to instruct in the Eureka since the R.A.F. insisted on a RADAR trained instructor for this equipment an R.A.F. serjeant to assist him and an R.A.F. officer to carry out liaison between the school and the operational squa dron at Tempsford. The technical staff also in cluded Royal Signals N.C.O.s who maintained the equipment and acted as assistant instructors. The normal course at S.T.S. 40 was of ten days duration the first three days being devoted to the general theory and maintenance of ultra-short wave wireless equipment and instruction in the S-Phonej the next three days were devoted to Eureka equipment and the remaining time was devoted to the practical use of this equipment with aircraft and instruction in the organisation of reception committees culmina ting in the full scale night exercise with the drop ping of stores to a reception committee composed of the students. To meet the needs of Country Sections for a more rapid training the syllabus 127 was modified and a short three day course 128 was in troduced dealing purely with the organisation of reception committees and omitting the handling of S-Phone and Eureka. Subsequently the increasing number of special demands made it necessary to take individuals or small groups for special courses in one or other branches of the syllabus. At all time however the principle was adhered to that students who would be called upon to handle the special equipment must receive a certificate of com petency from S.T.S. 40.  There is no doubt of the importance of this course and its usefulness was generally conceded by Country Sections and all those who attended it.   124 Training -Reception Committee -MT/9U3. 21.6.42.  125 Training -TR/O/l ADE/650. 15.9.43.  126 See Appendix l j  127 See Appendix Ill i .  128 Training -TR/Q/1 FVS/7237 29.4.44., 58  The only criticism commonly brought against the  course was on account of its length which could probably have been reduced had more aircraft been  available for exercises.  The school was closed down on 28th May 1945.  \  , 59. CHAPTER XII.  MISCRLLMEJUUS TRAINING.  1. JEDBURGH TRAINING. nJEDBURGH was the code name allotted to one branch of the S.O.E. participation in OVERLORD namely the despatch of allied teams to carry out liaison with the resistance forces in France and the Low Countries. The association of the Training Section with the JEDBURGH Scheme dates from the beginning of 1943 when the po tential usefulness of S.O.E. to the Army in invasion was being investigated. The first active partici pation was in Exercise SPARTAN which was run by the Army in March 1943 as a full-scale rehearsal for  OVERLORD and in which S.O.E. supplied both agents to work behind the enemy lines and British Staffs working with formations to maintain liaison between the armies and the agents and to collect and inter rogate the agents when they were over-run. The Training Section worked out the plan for the agents  known as BOYKINS on the basis of the Group B 96 hours scheme i.e. with the co-operation of M.I.5. and the Police and also briefed the agents. A number of Training Section officers were also employed on the liaison staffs.  Little further was done until the summer of 1943 when plans were drawn up for the establishment of a special training school to handle some 300 students 200 of them liaison officers and 100 wireless opera tors constituting 100 complete teams. The students were to be mainly British American and French with a small number of Belgian and Dutch officers. Some difficulty was experienced in finding a suitable site for the training but eventually in December 1943 Milton Hall Peterborough Northants was requisitioned and given the number of M.E. 65 - The S.T.S. nomen clature was avoided for security reasons as also to avoid difficulties for JEDBURGHS who might fall into enemy hands . A War Establishment for M.E. 65 129 was drawn up which allowed for a total staff of 236 under the command of a lieutenant colonel who had an instructional staff of 6 majors 22 captains or subal terns and 27 N.C.O.s.  Owing to the delays in requisitioning and-in the necessary constructional work M.E. 65 was not ready for occupation until the end of January 1944 but the urgency was such that the men were divided into companies and training was started in Group C schools  one company in each of S.T.S. 6 41 44 and 45 at the beginning of January. Previous to this the selection of JEDBURGHS had been carried out by the Training Section at a specially constituted selection board 130 based on the S.A.B. which was commanded by the Deputy President of the S.A.B. Major SINCLAIR  and partially staffed by S.A.B. officers. This board ' 129 See Appendix I k i   130 Training TR/I/1 MT/2579. 30.10.43., 60. was known as 205 Selection Board and was located at  S.T.S. 3. The training of JkDBURGHS was under the control of Lt.Col. F.V. SP00NBR first in his capacity of  O.C. Group C and subsequently as O.C. M.E. 65 which appointment he held from January to April 1944 when all JEDBURGH training was broughtunder the control of the newly formed JEDBURGH Section and the Command of M.E. 65 was taken over by Lt.Col. MUSGRAVE. The school remained under the control of the JEDBURGH Section until all their European commitments had been liquidated when it reverted to the Training Section as a General Purpose School 131 . The syllabus 132 of JEDBURGH training while the school was under the control of the Training Sec tion was based on the Para-military course modified by the peculiarities of guerilla warfare. Included in it were instruction in Reception Committee work and handling of foreign weapons both of which were carried out at M.E. 65 instead of at the Specialist Schools concerned owing to the numbers involved.  The developments in syllabus and.organisation after April 1943 are dealt with in the history of the JEDBURGH Section and no reference is therefore called for here.  2. S.O. . STAFF COURSES. It had been the original intention that all officers taking up appointments within S.O.E. or  S.T.S. should go through the training courses at least in a shortened form. The urgency of fil ling appointments was however such that this sound plan was not put into effect and even in the case of S.T.S. Instructors they were for a long time only trained in the work of the particular school to which they were posted. In the case of officers of S.O.E. Country Sections and other de partments they were mainly forced to acquire their knowledge in the exercise of their duties. Some attempt was made to remedy this state of affairs by week-end conferences which were held at Group B during the summer of 1941. At these conferences lectures were given by the instructors of Group B on the technique of organisation and the handling of agents and general discussions were held on the common problems of training and country sections. The results of these discussions were subsequently published 133 and showed that the ex change of ideas was most valuable. Only two such conferences were however held and apart from in dividual officers voluntarily attending courses at the training schools no further organised training of S.O.E. officers took place until 1943. This was in spite of a circular urging the necessity for training Country Section officers. 134  Tisi ' See below page 66.  132 See Appendix Ill j .   133 Archives 2/160/28. MZ/1108. 25.6.41.  134 ibid CD/TS/941 10.2.42., In April of that year CD directed 135 that an  S.O.E. Staff Course should be established partly for the general education of S.O.E. officers and to facilitate personal contact between members of dif ferent sections but primarily to educate those of ficers who would be called upon to work with array formations as S.O.E. liaison officers at the time of invasion. A general syllabus 136 was drawn up covering training in weapons demolitions un armed combat map reading security reception com mittee work and other subjects of the normal S.T.S. syllabus. At the same time lectures were given by S.O.E. Headquarters officers on the work of their own particular sections and special instruction and exercises were given in the staff duties of S.O.E. liaison officers. The course was established at S.T.S. 3 under the control of Colonel MUNN the school being under the command of Major GODFREY. The duration of the course was three weeks to which was added one wedk of parachute training. Six courses in all were held finishing in November 1943. To start with the course had been the responsibility of the MG Section but in August 1943 it was taken over entirely by the Training Section and Major T.H. GRAYSON assumed command of the school. 125 officers were trained in these courses. No further staff courses for S.O.E. officers were held until March 1945 when on the orders of CD courses were resumed this time at S.T.S. 41. The intention now was to provide refresher courses for officers who had seen service with S.O.E. in the Middle East and elsewhere and who were returning home to take up appointments in Headquarters or on their way to the Far East. The syllabus of the course remained much the same as it had been in 1943 except that the sections dealing with staff duties in connection with army formations were eliminated and lectures were given on matters specifically af fecting S.O.E. work in the Far East. Three such courses were run and 34 officers trained. No further courses were held since the number of officers available did not justify it and the Far Eastern Section preferred to get officers out to the Far East as sooh as possible to be trained on the spot. Provision was however made for fur ther courses to be run at M.E. 65 if necessary after the closing of Group C. The training of  S.T.S. officers is dealt with separately. 137 3. TRAINING IN MIMES AND FURhIGN hsAPONS. The first training in enemy weapons was carried out as part of the normal syllabus of Group A. With the increased appreciation of the importance of this subject and the slightly better supply of specimens more time was made available and in 1943 a collection was established at S.T.S. SEpiv  Glasnacardoeh where special two-day courses were run in conjunction with the Paramilitary course. This training continued until Group A was closed  135 Training -TR/c/5 DCDO/620. 20.2.43. 136 See Appendix Ill k . 137 See Chapter XIII Selection and Training of Officers  for S.T.S., 62. in the Autumn of 1944.  While the training at Group A constituted an excellent introduction to the subject it was felt that something more was needed particularly for men who were going to work in conjunction with guerilla forces which made extensive use of cap tured equipment. Furthermore instruction was called for not only in enemy weapons but also in enemy mines demolition equipment and booby-traps as well as in the laying and neutralising of Allied mines. To meet these needs one of the schools of Group C S.T.S. 3 Stodham Park was diverted from its normal function of an Operational Holding School and a specialist course in Mines Foreign Weapons and demolition equipment w'as instituted there in May 1944 138 . In July 1944 the course was transferred to S.T.S. 47 where it remained until its disbandment in June 1945.  The War Establishment 139 of the school  which remained unchanged with the move allowed for an instructional staff of a major commandant and chief instructor 2 captain instructors and 4 N.C.O. instructors 2 S/Sjts. and 2 Sjts. .  The course was organised in two sections foreign weapons in one and mines demolition equip ment and booby traps in the other. A comprehensive museum was established to which the specimens from Group A were added on its disbandment and a cottage was rigged with every known type of booby trap con nected to bells in which students could test out their knowledge. The syllabus 140 covered in the case of weapons identification including identifi cation of ammunition stripping stoppages and hand ling and in the case of mines demolition equipment and booby traps identification neutralisation and methods of use. As regards weapons the emphasis was placed on the common platoon weapons likely to be encountered.  In addition to the work of the specialist school specimens were available for revisionary work in the Operational Holding Schools of Group C.  4. PHOTOGRAPHY AMD MICRO-PHOTOGRAPHY. The first training in micro-photography under the auspices of the Training Section was carried out at S.T.P. in 1943. The purpose of this training was to enable agents in the Field to reduce documents to a size at which they could be conveniently concealed and carried. Strictly speaking two types of work were involved a direct reproduction by the use of a camera which might more correctly be called minia ture photography and b micro-photography proper  i.e. the reduction of a negative such as the one obtained y method a to microscopic demensions whether by the use of an actual microscope or by  138 Training -TR/A/4. Minutes of AD/Es Meetings 18.  139 See Appendix l l  140 See Appendix Ill l \  .44., other devices such as were developed later.  The number of students requiring training in this subject at S.T.P. and later S.T.S. 39 was very small and it was not necessary to work to any stereo typed syllabus each student being instructed separate ly. In July 1943 the demand for this type of train ing showed however a considerable increase largely it is believed in connection with courier work. Steps were therefore taken to set up a special photo graphic school 14l and S.T.S. 37a Warren House was made available for the purpose. Captain WADDICOR who had carried out most of the pioneer work in this subject was transferred from S.T.S. 39 to take command of it and 2 R.E. serjeants were recruited from the army to assist him.  Instruction was given at S.T.S. 37a in normal outdoor and indoor photography for reconnaissance purposes in addition to training in miniature and micro reproduction photography 142 . The length of the course depended upon a whether the student was concerned with one or more types of work b whether the student had any previous knowledge of photography and c the urgency which which the stu dent was required. Any time which could be given to practice over and above the basic period was of great value . Subject to these variable factors it can be reckoned that the course in miniature pho tography lasted from three to four days while the combined course lasted from seven to ten days.  The number of genuine students who were put through this form of training excluding those for whom it was merely a way of filling time was very small i.e. 15 up to January 1944 and did not jus tify the permanent retention of even so small an establishment as S.T.S. 37a which could at its maximum only handle some three or four students at a time. 143 S.T.S. 37a was therefore closed as a photographic school and reverted to Group B. The equipment was transferred in February 1944 to  S.T.S. 39 144 and one of the serjeant instruc tors was sent there to continue any training that might be required and to assist in the photographic training in connection with propaganda work. The other serjeant instructor wras transferred to the Far Eastern Section to carry out photographic train ing in India. Captain WADDICOR was transferred to AD/M Section for liaison work in connection with propaganda matters. It was at this time that the Kodak SS was adopted as the standard camera for S.O.E. work and all training was based on it 145 . Photographic training continued at S.T.S. 39 until the closing of that establishment in July 1944 when the serjeant instructor ana his equip ment were transferred to the Photographic Section   141 Training TR/G/lOc MTl/685. 7.7.43.  142 ibid MT/668 21.8.43.  143 ibid MT/3409 18.1.44.  144 ibid JTY/3556 1.2.44.  145 Training TR/A/4 Minutes of AD/E s Meeting 16.3.44., 64. at Headquarters under CP who thereafter became res ponsible for any photographic training that was reouired which was carried out in Country Section flats   146 . Although the amount of training carried out was disproportionately small in relation to the expendi ture involved considerable advances were made in the technique of micro-photography and these remain of permanent value. The technical processes involved are set out ih detail in the syllabus of training   147 . 5. CARRIER PIGEONS. Carrier pigeons had been used sporadically by the urganisation ever since its inception but it was not until the spring of 1944 that the question of developing this form of communication was more thoroughly examined. A paper had been submitted by the Commandant Group B on the possibilities of pigeons particularly when used in conjunction with miniature or even micro-photography to supplement the normal Yif/T service and on 24th April 1944 this question was discussed at a meeting 148 at which members of the Country Sections the Training Sec tion and the Signals Direcorate were present. Probably very largely as a result of the statement by the Signals Representative that cuts were to be expected in the W/T Service at the time of invasion a decision was reached that an increased use would be made of carrier pigeons and that training would be carried out by S.O.E. and not as hitherto by the Special Signals Section at Wing House. In addition the Research Section was instructed to go into the question of avoiding casualties to pigeons dropped by parachute.  Lofts were established at Group B and at a number of schools in Group C and instructors from those schools were trained at Wing House. Training in the handling of pigeons was not made a special course but was introduced into the normal curriculum of those agents for whom the Country Sections re quested it 149 .  Less use than had been anticipated of carrier pigeons was made by Country Sections but where they were used quite reasonable results were obtained the main trouble still being casualties to the birds during despatch by parachute.  Facilities for training remained until the dis bandment of the schools but no training was carried out after the end of 1944.  6. LUCK PICKING. Training in lock picking and methods of burglary was introduced into the normal syllabus of Group B in   146 Training TR/a/4 Minutes of AD/E s Meeting 22.6.44.  147 Handbook Appendix 5.  148 Training TR/N/lU ADli/210 1.5.44. Minutes of Meeting on the increased use of Carrier Pigeons.  149 Training TR/N/lO GMF/4171/N.10. 4.5.44., 1942 in order to enable agents in the Field to carry out this type of work and also to have a general know ledge which would be useful to them in directing local  professionals whom they might recruit. A great deal of useful assistance was obtained in the study of burglarsJ methods from M.I.5 and from Scotland  Yard. Facilities were also granted by the police for  an interview with a man who in his time had been a  successful burglar. As a result of this assistance  and of experiments carried out in the schools a high  standard of success was reached.  Instruction covered the making of keys the pick ing of locks and the best methods of illegal entry into premises cupboards etc. The opening of safes by other methods than that of key copying was not attempted as this was considered outside the scope of the average agent in the Field vdio would in any case be unlikely to have access to the necessary equipment which can hardly be improvised . In all this training emphasis was placed on the necessity for the agent to make his own equipment and to avoid as far as possible being in possession of compromising material.  To begin with all instruction in lock picking was given at Group B but in the spring of 1943 instruc tors from Group C were trained in the subject which became a normal part of Operational Holding School training.  The syllabus was continually undergoing revision and many new methods were evolved including methods hitherto unknown by Scotland Yard of unlocking hand cuffs.  The culmination of lock picking training was in the T Force Course which took place at S.T.S. 17 and which combined the previous training with methods of safe-breaking 150 .  7. HOME-MADE EXPLOSIVES. In May .1943 training was introduced at Station XVIII loaned for this purpose by the Polish Section in the methods of preparing explosives from chemicals which were normally obtainable in Occupied Countries   151 .In this way it was hoped tions in the Field to some extent independent of para chuted supplies or at least to put them in a position to improvise should supplies be temporarily cut off. The course at Station XVIII lasted seven days and was designed to instruct students without any previous knowledge of chemistry in safe and simple methods which could be carried out without any specialised equipment.  152 .This course was transferred on 15th August 1943 and in October 1943 was finally transferred from S.T.S. 17 to Group C 154 and in struction was given in whichever of the Operational  15 B See Chapter VIII. Training at S.T.S. 17 .   151 Training -Home Made Devices MT/419. 20.4.43.   152/ Training -Home Made Devices DSR/4762. 13.5.43.  .153 Training -TR/j/2. MT/872. 29.7.43.  .154 Training -TR/J/2. FVS/4224. 2.11.43., 66   Holding Schools it was required. In addition to this elementary training courses were also run at the laboratories at South Kensington in conjunction with DSR for the training of instruc tors in the manufacture of explosives. These courses lasted for three weeks and pre-supposed some tech nical knowledge on the part of the student's.  8. TRAINING AT M.E. 65. When all European Jedburgh training and holding commitments were ultimately liquidated in March 1945  M.E. 65 was taken over again by the Training Section. The War Establishment 155 was reduced giving a total staff of 59 and the rank of the commandant s vacancy was reduced to major. An instructional staff of 4 captains and 6 N.C.O.s was allowed. The school was placed under the command of Major B.W. GILMOUR who still holds the appointment. The school was organised both to undertake large training commitments of a general para-mili tary or operational nature and also to act as a transit camp for S.O.E. personnel moving to and from overseas threatres. For this latter purpose a close liaison was maintained with the Administra tive Section of Headquarters but the work was under the control of the Director of Training as were all the other activities of the school. In June 1945 with the closing down of the Signals Schools a Signals Wing was established at M.E. 65 to deal with the training and selection of S.O.E. signals personnel being sent overseas. This wing came un der the direct command of O.C. M.E. 65 though tech nical matters were referred to the Director of Sig nals.  With the closing down in June 1945 of the re maining training schools the War Establishment of  M.E. 65 was again modified 156 this time to give the additional instructors necessary to enable it to handle all basic forms of S.O.E. Training i.e. para-military and operational training industrial sabotage foreign weapons and equipment and recep tion work. It was also specified that it should be capable of carrying out any further S.O.E. Staff Courses which might be required. At the same time it continued its functions as a transit camp. The main training commitments undertaken by  M.E. 65 since its return to the Training Section was that of 120 French Airborne Commando troops for the Far East.  1555 See Appendix I k ii.  .156 See Appendix l k iii., CHAPTER XIII.  SELECTION AND TRAINING UF OFFICERS FOR S.T.S.  1. METHOD OF SELECTION. Officers were whenever possible selected in the first place by personal recommendation. Ifhen this was not possible application was made to the appro priate A.G. Branch in the War Office who brought for ward batches of officers for interview. The interviews which officers of both categories attended were conducted a in the case of Group B S.T.S. 17 and S.T.S. 39 by the commandants concerned with or without the assistance of their Chief Instructors and   b in the case of all other schools and groups by the Director of Training and the Commandants of Groups A and C sitting as a board. 2. QUALIFICATIUNS.  i Para-Military Training. A good type of regimental officer was required having some instructional ability such as might normally be acquired in the exercise of his nor mal regimental duties . A knowledge of a foreign language was considered desirable but not essen tial. As far as possible officers were chosen between the ages of 25 and 35 and in medical cate gory A as the type of training called for physi cal fitness and they might be called upon to pro ceed overseas.   ii Parachute Training. Officers who were already trained parachutists were clearly desirable but if these could not be found an officer who showed an aptitude for this work was trained at S.T.S. 51. The age limits as for para-military training were roughly between 25 and 35 and officers always had to be of medical category A. Again a knowledge of languages was desirable but not essential.   iii Agents Finishing Training. Officers with previous intelligence training and if possible experience were required in addi tion to which it was necessary for them to have a sound knowledge of one or more Continental coun tries and a knoKfledge of one or more European lan guages of a sufficient standard to enable them to lecture. Previous teaching experience either in civil life or at the Intelligence Training Centre was insisted on to start with but when the supply of suitably qualified officers began to get short officers who had the other requisite quali fications and who showed after a short trial that they had the necessary instructional ability were accepted. The age limits were placed between 25, 68. and 45 and officers of medical category dovrti to  C were accepted though the majority had to be  of A and B categories as they would not other   wise be eligible for posting to overseas es  tablishments if required.   iv Propaganda Training. The qualifications required were essentially the same as for Agents Finishing Training except that an Intelligence background was not insisted on. A general understanding of international politics was however considered of importance together with some technical knowledge of the principles of propaganda opinion sampling me thods of reproduction psychology etc.   v Industrial. Sabotage Training. For this the following qualifications given in their order of importance were required  -Not less than eight to ten years general ex perience in one or more of the heavy indus tries or their equivalent e.g. pov er sta tions. A shorter period might be ac cepted for junior instructors working under supervision.  -Considerable practical experience of machin ery. Experience in the direction of heavy machinery was of particular advantage.  -A degree or at least a diploma -d'rom a tech nical college.  -Military experience. When a potential in structor had not got this it was essential that he should pass through the para-miliary courses of the Organisation before being pos ted to S.T.S. 17. Even when he had previous military experience this was desirable see under Method of Training below .   vi Reception Committee Training. No special qualifications were called for here and in practice instructors were drawn from either para-military or operational schools and trained at S.T.S. 40. The only exception to this was in the case of instructors in Eureka equipment who had to be R.A.F. officers with RADAR training.   vii Mines and Foreign Yteapons Training. Special qualifications were again not demanded for this type of work and instructors were normally drawn from para-military or operational schools. Preference was however given to Sapper officers for work in connection with enemy mines and devices.   viii Operational Training. In theory an instructor in operational train ing should be able to combine the capabilities of, 69. instructors in all other schools. This in practice  was impossible and the more intelligent and exper  ienced officers of the para-military type were nor  mally selected for this work.   ix Headquarters Officers. Generally spea'king Headquarters officers were drawn from among the instructors or commandants of the Training Schools as it was only in this way that a proper understanding of S.O.E. training pro blems could be obtained. The only exception was in the case of officers dealing with administrative matters and students movements etc. where adminis trative experience either inside or outside the Organisation was considered the essential quali fication.  3. METHOD OF TRAINING. In the early days the urgency with which instructors were required made it impossible for them to be trained elsewhere than in the schools to which they were posted though considerable efforts were made later on to remedy this specialisation by sending instructors on courses in the other schools. Early in 1943 however the general policy was formulated that all instructors would go through the full curriculum of training in all schools and that their ultimate posting would depend on the ap titudes shown during their training. In practice this never applied to the instructors of Group B S.T.S. 17 or S.T.S. 39 owing to the exceptional qualifications required and the specialist nature of the work but other potential instructors attended courses at these schools. There isno doubt that the system was bene ficial and had it been possible to apply it in the early days the discrepancies in training to which reference has already been made would at least have been less marked., 70. THIS IS A COPY '-1 ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION CHAPTER XIV 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 TRAINING CARRIED OUT BY OTHER SECTIONS.  While most of the training of S.O.E. personnel was carried out under the auspices of the Training Section there were two major exceptions which must   be considered separately i.e. highly technical specialist training and training carried out by individual Country Sections.  1. TECHNICAL TRAINING. The principle here was that if training was to such a degree technical as to demand the services of specialist officers a special organisation or locality such training was best carried out by the headquarters section responsible for that type of work. The three main examples are Signals Train ing Pick-up Training and Naval Training.   a Signals Training. Early in 1941 an elementary signals train ing school was established at Vineyards in the Beaulieu area to give preliminary training to S.O.E. onerators whose advanced training was done by As the Signals Section was only in an embryoriic state this school was placed under the Training Section which already had an organisation capable of administering a country establishment. In the summer of 1941 this -school under the command of Captain KAPLOWITCH was moved to S.T. . 52 Grendon Hall Grendon Underwood Aylesbury Bucks subsequently re numbered Station 53a and the facilities were increased to enable S.O.E. to undertake the full training of its W/T men.  By'the beginning of 1942 the Signals Sec tion had been enlarged and all technical mat ters affecting S.T.S. 52 were under its control. The administration remained however in the hands of the Director of Training and a Signals Of ficer was retained on his staff until the sum mer of 1942.  Towards the'end of 1942 S.T.S. 52 together with other signals establishments was taken over entirely by the Signals'Section later Director ate and. the Training Section ceased to have any responsibility for it. Liaison between'Country Sections and S.T.S. 52 was still assured by the Training Section which also undertook the book ing of courses but this was only done in order to centralise the control of students movements.  Apart from the very early developments which were largely due to the energy and somewhat un orthodox methods of Captain KAPLOWITCH the Sig nals training of S.O.E. is closely bound up with the Directorate of Signals in the history of which it is fully treated., VI   3. 4 OF THEp.ffl  r-o-'T.-dSH   b Pick-up Training . ' R Pick-up Training was developed in 1941 in con nection with the Lysander pick-up operations then being carried out mainly in Prance. It was sub sequently increased in scope to cover all forms of operations which involved the landing and taking off of aircraft in enemy held territory. The most usual 'alternative to the Lysander being the Hudson .  Training was carried out entirely by the R.A.F. at Tempsford Aerodrome and courses lasted approxi    mately one week. Instruction was given in all the aspects of selecting suitable landing grounds in the peculiar problems of the pick-up pilot in the laying out of the flare path and in the duties of the passenger. In addition it enabled the pilots and the men who would be selecting the grounds and organising the reception to get acquainted thus engendering mutual confidence. No landing ground or pick-up operation which h d not been layed on by a man trained and passed proficient at Tempsford would be accepted by the R.A.P. Except for one short period from September to December 1943 when the Training Section made the bookings for courses 157 all aspects of pick-up training were under the control of the Air Liaison Section in whose history the subject is fully treated   c Naval Training. Naval training was broadly speaking the marine equivalent of pick-up training preparing men to arrange for the reception of stores or personnel and for the exfiltration of agents by sea. The craft mainly M.T.B.'s which carried out the opera tions were based on the Helford River for Prance and in the Shetlands for Norway and the necessary training was carried out by the operational crews in the respective bases. This training came en tirely under the Naval Section D/NAVY and the Training Section was in no way involved.  The para-naval training carried out at Group A did teach elementary-boatwork which was.of use in landing operations but was more concerned with attacks on shipping or the approach to a target by water than with the reception of men and stores by sea. As already stated it was concentrated purely on the offensive side from 1943 158 .  2.COUNTRY SECTION TRAINING.  Despite the acceptance of the general principle that all training should be controlled by a Director of Training certain Country Sections were responsible for parts if not the whole of the training of their agents. The sections concerned were the Polish Czech and Norwegian.   a Polish Section Training. The position of the Poles in relation to S.O.E. had always been exceptional in that they retained   157 Training TR/Q/5 MT1/1278 of 30.9.43. and ADE/530 of 10.12.43.  158 See above Chapter V Paramilitary Training page 28., 72. far more control over both the operation and  training of their men than other nationalities. As early as the end of 1940 the principle was established that Polish officers would carry out part at least of the instruction of their nationals and it was therefore necessary to  allocate definite accommodation to the Polish  section.  The first school allocated was Briggins which was used as a Polish Finishing School in January 1941. It was under the command of a British officer with a mixed Polish and Bri tish staff and continued as a Finishing School until March 1942 when it was taken over by I.S.R.B. as Station VIII. The second school made avail able to the Polish section was Audley End House   S.T.S. 43 in April 1942. It had previously been since 1941 an operational and despatch station. This again was under a British com mandant with a mixed staff and was administered by the Training Section though training was un der the Polish Section until the summer of 1943 when it came under the Polish section for all pur poses. It was used for holding operational training and for despatch. The Polish section also acquired other coun try establishments which never haql any connection with the Training Section and full details on these as on the work carried out at Briggens and at Audley End will be found in the Polish Sec tion History.  All training for Polish students was not how ever carried out in these schools. Parachute training continued to be carried out at S.T.S. 51 and until 1944 parties of Poles were given agents training at Group B.  The Polish Minorities Section EU/P which grew from the main Polish Section MP had its training carried out in the normal way by the Training Section until it acquired in 1943  S.T.S. 63 Warnham Court Nr. Horsham Sussex which was entire under its control. This was used both as a training and holding estab lishment and was acquired at a time when the number of EU/P Section students.was being great ly increased and the operational plan involved an indefinite holding commitment. Parachute and some specialist training e.g. Mines and Foreign Weapons was still however carried out by the Training Section. The training carried out for EU/P section by the Training Section calls for no special com ment and that carried out at S.T.S. 63 is treated fully in the History of the section concerned.   b Czech Section Training. The Czech Section was under the same Regional control as the Polish Section and the relations between the Czech authorities and S.O.E. were, similar to those obtaining in the case of Poland. To begin with however training was carried out in the normal way by the Training Section but in July 1942 S.T.S. 46 Chichley Hall was made avail able to the Czech Section as a general purpose hold ing and operational school where they could have Czech instructors and in May 1943 the school was handed over entirely to them. From that time on wards the Training Section was only concerned with the parachute training of Czech students with the exception of occasional courses at Group B and the specialist schools.  As with the Polish section the Czech section also used certain other country establishments for holding purposes but these were never connected with the Training Section. A full account of Czech training will be found in the Country Section history.   c Norwegian Section Training. Until the summer of 1943 training of Norwegian students had been carried out by the Training Sec tion on much the same basis as that of other na tionalities with the exception that a special hold ing and operational school was established for them in November 1941 at S.T.S. 26 Drumentoul Lodge and Glenmore Lodge Aviemore Inverness-shire. Since this school was used as a base for operations the participation of the Country Section in training was greater than in other cases and at least one Country Section Officer was permanently in resi dence. A further difference was that the students held at the school constituted a unit of the Nor wegian army with their own national officers.  In view of these peculiarities and also be cause of the strong views held by Lt.Col. Wilson The Country Section Head on the responsibility of Country Sections in the training of their men the control of the school was transferred entirely to him in the summer of 1943. All phases of train ing at S.T.S. 26 are fully covered in the history of the Scandinavian Region., 74.  CHAPTER XV. OVERSEAS TRAINING SCHOOLS.  1. GENERAL. It appears to have been the original intention   159 for the responsible for all S.O.E. schools in whatever thea tre they might be situated. For a variety of rea sons chief of which perhaps was the failure to enforce the original directive the majority of over seas schools became almost entirely divorced from the Training Section in England. In the absence of guidance from or liaison with the Training Section local S.O.E. Commanders made themselves responsible for setting up or developing their training establish ments according to their own lights and came as a result to regard any subsequent attempt to impose control from England as interference in their sphere of responsibility.  It is true that the instructors were in the first place sent out from the Training Section in England  since these were the only officers available with a knowledge of S.O.E. methods but once the overseas schools werp established they recruited and trained locally except when a particular specialist was re quired or no suitable candidate could be found on the spot. The decision as to whether an officer should be sent from England rested with the local Commander and not with the-Director of Training.  Inspite of the absence of control some informal liaison did exist and copies of syllabus training instructors etc. were sent via the London sec tions to overseas schools. Up to the beginning of 1944 the machinery of distribution seems to have been unreliable and schools failed to receive much of what was destined for them. From the beginning of 1944 onwards there was a considerable improvement in this respect.  At the beginning of 1945 the whole question of the sphere of influence of the Director of Training was raised 160 by Colonel F.V. SPOONER who then held the appointment and a directive was issued by CD 161 giving him a considerable measure of con trol over overseas establishments. For various reasons e.g. the closing of schools abroad and general developments in the war situation it was not possible for this directive to be effectively implemented though a certain increased liaison did result.  With one exception S. T.S. 103 in Canada it is not therefore possible from the records available to the Training Section to make more than brief   159 To MILPAL of S9.7.42. also Training TR/A/1 MT/567/A.1 of 19.12.44.  160 Training TR/A/l MT/5679/A.1. 19.12.44.  161 ibid CD/7551 2.1.45., reference to overseas training schools.  2. S.T.S. 103. The idea of establishing a training school in Canada was first discussed in the summer of 1941   162 and by October 1941 a site had been found near Toronto and the syllabus and constitution of the school to be known as S.T.S. 103 were laid down  163 .The first course started in  164 .The purpose of establishing Canada was twofold first to train men recruited in Canada for service with S.O.E. in Europe French Canadians refugees etc. and secondly to assist  the American S.I. and S.O branches which since America was not in the war at that time could not be done on American soil. As soon as America came into the war the latter side of the work of S.T.S. 103 increased in importance and in addition to  training large numbers of Americans for Security and  Propaganda work in South America very great assis  tance was given to O.S.S. and O.W.I. in the setting up of their own schools and the training of their  staff.  S.T.S. 103 was under the control of the New York Mission for administrative purposes but its train ing activities were subject to the control of the Director of Training in England who also appointed the Commandant and Instructional Staff the adminis trative staff being supplied by the Canadian Army. The school was originally placed under the command of Lt.Col. ROPER-CALDBECK who was replaced in De cember 1941 by Lt.Col. R.M. BROOKER. Major C. SKILBECK the Chief Instructor was promoted lieu tenant-colonel and took over from him in the early part of 1943 remaining in command until the clos ing of the achool on 20th Aoril 1 44 165 . Ris iplace as Chief Instructor was taken by Major P.E. DEHN. All these officers with the exception of Lt.Col. ROPER-CALDBECK were sent to S.T.S. 103 from Group B.  Training at S.T.S. 103 covered the paramilitary agents Group B and propaganda syllabus. As far as the agents recruited in Canada for employment by S.O.E. were concerned only the paramilitary syllabus was  given the remaining training being given in England. The Group B and propaganda training was however given to American students and those concerned with the set ting up of American schools.  One noteworthy fact about S.T.S. 103 is that un like the schools in England it was not accommodated in existing buildings but in a specially constructed camp in an area chosen for its suitability 166 .   162 Training TR/N/lO Report by Lt. . T VRDSAY on a visit to the U.S.A. and Canada regarding the formation of STS 24.9.41.  163 Training TR/S/l MT/lOl 27.10.41.  164 From NEW YORK 17810 10.12.41.  165 Training TR/S/l CD/3Q19 24.9.42.  166 Training TR/S/l SO/924 30.3.'42., Apart from the advantage this gave as regards lay out it meant that the additions which became nec essary to house the W/T Station which handled all  S.O.E. New York traffic could be made more easily than could have been the case with a requisitioned house 3. OTftER OVERSEAS S.T.S. The first of the overseas training schools to be established was M.E. 102 at Haifa which was1 opened in December 1940. This was under the con trol of S.O.M. and was moved to Italy when condi tions allowed of this. It carried out all forms of training for work in the Balkans and Middle East. There was a separate parachute training wing.  After the Allied landings in North Africa a group of schools was established by the Massingham Mission in Algiers to train men for work into the south of France and Italy. These schools were also transferred to Italy after the Allied landings there.  Complete training organisations were established by S.O.E. in India 'and S.O. Australia for the train ing of men both European and native to work into  Japanese occupied territory.  None of the foregoing schools were under the con trol of the Director of Training though as already stated some liaison did exist and instructors were sent out from this country. Detailed accounts of the work and development of these training schools must therefore be sought in the histories of the respective missions concerned., 77. I  CHAPTER XVI.  ASSISTANCE GIVEN TO OTHER ORGANISATIONS AND SERVICES.  In addition to the training of S.O.E. agents assis tance was given to a number of outside bodies which are listed below  1. P.W.E. All training of P.W.E. Political Warfare Executive agents was carried out by S.T.P. and later S.T.S. 39. In addition to Propaganda teaching they were also trained in weapons parachuting radio and the tech nique of clandestine life and organisation at the appropriate S.T.S. Assistance was also given in the selection of personnel by the loan of technical staff from the S.A.B.  2. THE 'C1 ORGANISATION S.I.S. . S.O.E. undertook all parachute training for the 'C Organisation and an average of six vacancies were taken up weekly at S.T.S. 51 by their students. This number was considerably increased at the end of 1943 and in early 1944 to handle the personnel of their 'Sussex' plan. The Intelligence equivalent of the Jedburgh scheme . 872 students were trained in all. 3. S.A.S. Prom 1943 onwards there was a fairly constant flow of S.A.S. Special Air Service personnel to S.T.S. 51 for parachute training 172 being trained in all.  4. O.S.S. O.S.S. Office of Strategic Services established no training schools properly speaking in England and all their personnel operated from here were trained in our schools although some had received previous training in the U.S.A. After the integration of O.S.S. and S.P. Headquarters in the summer of 1943 no dis tinction was made between students from American and British sources. The arrangement was of reciprocal value as O.S.S. not only supplied the Training Section with considerable quantities of equipment but also made available Instructqrs who worked in the schools. 5. D.G.E.R. When the French set up in the autumn of 1944 under the D.G.E.R. Direction Generale des Etudes et Recherches a group of training schools known as Centre 20 the Train ing Section of S.O.E. was consulted. Colonel VIAT the officer responsible for setting up the schools visited the British training establishments some of which he, % 78  \ already knew as a student and consulted the Direc tor of Training who undertook to supply him not only with information and with facilities for train ing instructors in-England but also to make avail able to him Britisji instructors who could assist in starting courses at Centre 20. In all five officers and four N.C.O.s were attached for vary ing lengths of time up to May 1945 to Centre 20 and in addition the Director of Training paid se veral visits in an advisory capacity. Again this arrangement was of value to the Training Section of S.O.E. as the French made available much valu able information on German methods and through the connection with Centre 20 it proved possible to collect a number of specimens of enemy weapons mines and other devices which it had been diffi cult to obtain through other channels.  6. M.I.5. The direct assistance given to M.I.5 by the Training Section was limited to courses given at Group B to R.S.L.O.s in the methods of clandestine warfare referred to under Agents Finishing Train ing and to courses in Counter Sabotage methods   referred to under S.T.S. 17 .  7. S.A.A.R.F. When S.A.A.R.F. Special Allied Airborne Rescue Force was formed in the spring of 1945 the assis tance of the S.O.E. Training Section was enlisted for the training of their personnel. Parachute training was carried out at S.T.S. 51 and four of ficers and two N.C.O.s were loaned to them to assist in training at their camp at Wentworth.  8. MISCELLANEOUS. In addition to the foregoing a number of indi vidual officers and other ranks were trained for the Army the Admiralty the Foreign Office etc., 79. --Ml.1 I..I I--   CHAPTER XVII.  CONCLUSION.  Until such time as a comprehensive analysis of the work of S.O.E. has been completed it is not possible to make a final assessment of the work of the Training Section nor to express definite opinions on the sound ness of the policy pursued. All that will therefore be attempted here will b an indication of those points of training which on account of their controversial nature or their fundamental importance will require consideration in making a final estimate or in plan ning a future training organisation.  1. GENERAL ORGANISATION. Considering the urgency of the demand for training facilities and fhre absence of previous experience of training for large-scale sabotage the organisation adopted was surprisingly successful. That it was so is in large part due to the far-sightedness and energy of the early training officers in drawing up and carry ing through a workable plan. -There can be no right and wrong way of carrying out training there are a variety of ways each of which given the-appropriate personalities and the suitable conditions may produce equally good results. Furthermore what is good in one war is not necessarily good in another and quite possibly bad in peacetime. The alternative systems are therefore summarised briefly.   a That training should be the responsibility of a central training section as at present but that with the exception of certain specialist instruction all subjects should be taught in the same schools of which one would be allotted to each nationality. 167 . The advantages adduced for this scheme are first that it facilitates the co-ordination of all types of training and produces a greater sense of relative importance of the various aspects of training on the part of the student and secondly that it saves time and money in travelling.  b That training should be the responsibility of Country Sections. This was partially applied in the case of the Norwegian Polish and Czech sections 168 and a comparison will therefore be possible of the results achieved. Colonel J.S. WILSON is a prominent advocate of active Country Section participation in training and the question is treated in some detail by him in the history of the Scandinavian Region. 2. THE POSITION OF THE DIRECTOR OF TRAINING. Given that there is a central training section   167 Handbook -Recommendations Views of Colonel J.T. YOUNG .  168 See above page 71., 80.  and there must surely be some co-ordinating body even if training is in Country Section hands the Director of Training cannot carry out his functions  satisfactorily unless he is consulted at the plan ning stage and on a high level. Furthermore his authority must be assured and he must be in a po  sition to demand information from all sources 169 .  In this War the position of the Director of Train ing was equivocal 170 .  3. THE SELECTION OF AGEHTS. Here there are two main questions   a Whether selection should be by Country Sections or by a central board such as the S.A.B. Experience in this Yifar showed that recruitment by Country Sections led to the in troduction into training of many -undesirable elements with consequent difficulties of dis posal and strained relations with M.I.5. On the other hand it is held that an indepen dent board tends to be too rigid in its me thods causing the rejection of potentially suitable men. It Is undoubtedly cheaper for selection to be carried out by Country Sec tions and if they have recruiting officers of sound judgement the results may be equal ly satisfactory but the advantage of scien tific selection generally accepted in the services as valuable Is lost.  b If there is a central selection board under hose control it should be placed. The S.A.B. was controlled by the Training Section largely because they had the ex perience and machinery to administer a coun try establishment but also because the idea of introducing the S.A.B. came from the Direc tor of Training. Possible alternatives are for the S.A.B. to be under the control of a more impartial section or for its technical machinery to be available to Country Sections who would supply the President and possibly M.T.O.s when their students came before it. This would mean in practice. Country Section recruiting but with the assistance of scien tific methods. 4. THE SEGREGATION OF STUDENTS. From a security point of view it is arguable  that a segregation of individuals or operational groups is more important than a segregation of na tionalities. Agents of the s&me nationality go ing to the same country constitute far more of a danger to each other in the event of treachery or the leakage of information under interrogation than men of different nationalities. On the other hand from the point of view of efficient and economical   169 Handbook -Recommendations Views of Colonel J.T. YOUNG and Colonel F.V. SPOONER .  170 See above page 7., 81. training groups of nationals are desirable since they have a common language outlook and interests and also because training must be based on the conditions under which men are going to work and these conditions vary from country to country. The ideal is clearly indi vidual training but if the numbers involved approach  those handled in this war such a system is impossible because of the numbers of instructors and establishments needed and the resultant expense.  As will have been seen the original plan provided for complete segregation of nationalities and this system continued to be applied at Groups A and B and in the Operational Holding schools of Group C. It was not however applied at S.T.S. 17 39 or 51 nor at the wireless training schools. In many cases the result was therefore that the full advantages of neither sys tem were obtained but the disadvantages of both were suffered.  What measure and type of segregation is desirable in training needs careful consideration in the light of an analysis of the enemy's successes in penetrating and breaking down organisations in the Field. It is also related to the methods of organisation used in the Field since it is pointless to take great care to prevent two men meeting who will be constantly meet ing in the Field and it is fatal if two men are to ignore each others existence in operations for them to have met in training.  5. OVERSEAS TRAINING SCHOOLS. If the conditions of this War are ever repeated with training schools in different parts of the world each serving a separate theatre of war a decision will have to be reached as to the measure of control to be imposed from the U.K. or wherever the central organi sation is based. It is clear that the local conditions in different theatres produce the need for special types of training which it is difficult if not impossible to appreciate at a distance of several thousand miles. At the same time there are basic principles of train ing and types of equipment of widespread utility and training in these should be standardised at the high est level of efficiency. Furthermore unless there is centralised control the lessons learnt in one theatre which may be of value in another will never circulate. Again without central control the most economic use of trained instructors becomes impossible as there can be no balancing of a surplus in one thea tre with a demand in another.  It would seem that the solution may lie not in a rigid control from the U.K. of all training but rather in the Director of Training becoming the central co ordinating point of all training. This could be achieved both by personal liaison visits and by having represen tatives attached to each theatre commander. Whether this is so or not a firm decision should be sought., 82. as the hesitancy 171 which marked the official attitude towards the question in this War caused many difficulties if not loss of efficiency.  6. SUPPLIES OF ENEMY EQUIPMENT. The greatest difficulty was encountered in obtaining adequate supplies of enemy equipment for training purposes. This applied both to German and Japanese equipment. It was not un til 1944 that adequate supplies of German equip ment became available and only a few isolated specimens of Japanese equipment ever reached this country despite repeated requests in both cases. Since men must be taught to use enemy weapons explosives etc. which may fall into their hands   and indeed in clandestine and guerilla work the only equipment may well be that of the enemy a high priority should be given to the training sec tion of any offensive clandestine organisation for the allocation of captured equipment.  7. STANDARD CHARGES. i There has been and still is considerable con troversy on the subject of explosive charges. On the one hand it is contended that an. agent should be instructed in the principles of demolition so that given the bulk explosive fuse etc. he can make up suitable charges for the work to be carried out also that he should be proficient in the use of numerous special devices adapted to particular types of target. This was the view held by Group A and by the Research Section On the other hand it is held that since agents are not al /ays of high intelligence and since much work in the Field is carried out by men who receive instruction at se cond or third hand it is better to evolve a sim ple standard made-up charge which the operator has only to fix and initiate and to drill students thoroughly in the uses which can be made of it. This was the view of S.T.S. 17 and of the Director of Training who authorised the introduction of standard charges 172 . A decision as to which faction was in the right if there is one solution must await the results of technical evaluation.   172 See above page 26, , 84 APPENDIX 1 a . Notified in A.C.Is 15th March 1944. Effective date 29th February 1944. VIIX/313/2.  CONFIDENTIAL. H.Q. SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOLS. CNot an Army Establishment HOI'/EE WAR ESTABLISHMENT. Personnel. 79/W.E./4561 S.D.3  o aJ Oatm u 00 ft 3in H  Detail oa D-p 0 4-5 0  Sh03 O0 O 0 I  2 OOffl I-Hx ooI Jp ato  -H & 0 H H Hat CO in u o f. ato -P r o HQ p attc o CO W3 o t.oa c 10 Lieutenant-colone1 General staff officer 1st grade General staff officers 2nd grade General staff officers 3rd grade 4 4 Majors 3 3 Staff captain 1 1 Captains 6 6 Staff Lieutenant 1 1 Subalterns 12 12 Total officers 32 32 Clerks R.A.S.C. 3 Cinema projectionist R.A.O.C. 1 1 Drivers I.C. R.A.S.C. 5 5 Storemen 22 Orderlies for - Officers' mess 2 2 Other ranKs' mess 1 1 Regimental Police 6 7 Motor-cyclists 3 3 General dutymen 16 22 Total other ranks. 39 52 Attached -  A.C.C. cooks for - Officers' mess 3 3 Other ranks' mess 2 2 Total attached Total H.fei. special training schools  including attached 32 6 44 89 Tnis establishment supersedes W.E. No. VIII/313/l being a re-write Incorporating amendments 1-5., \ O l \ . / i, 86. APPENDIX 1 b Notified in A.C.Is for 31st December 1941. Effective date 5th December 1941.  VII1/208/2. SECURITY  SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOLS NOS. 1 to 6 HOME WAR ESTABLISHMENT   i Personnel 79/W.E./4035 S.D.S.' Officers Staff-serjeants and serjeants.  1 Corporals.   Total special training   schools.   .  w     p aS    H   Ph   0. Detail  Commandant and chief instructor major Adjutant and quartermaster  subaltern Instructor lieutenant Assistant instructors -   R.E. Infantry  signalling Ij weapon training l  A.P.T.C. Company quartermasterserjeant. Clerks Batman Cooks A.C.C. for - Officers rness Serjeants mess Rank and file mess  Orderlies for - Officers mess Serjeants mess Rank and file mess  Driver I.C. R.A.S.C. Motor-cyclist orderly Regimental police Sanitary dutyman Storeman General dutymen may be unfit for general service  1  1 1  1  2 1  1 2 1  1 1 3  1 1 3 1 1 7 1 1  6  1 1 1  1 2 1 1 1 2 1  1 1 2  1 1 3 1 1 6 1 1  6  Total special train  ing schools. Nos. 1  to6. 3 3 4 28 38   Includes 1 corporal and 2 lance-corporals, 87.  ii Transport Motor-cycle 1 Truck 15-cvit. 4-wheeled 1 This establishment supersedes W.JL. No. VIII/208/1 in War Establishments Volume VIII., APPEIM DIX l c Notified in A.C.Is. 20th October 1943. Effective date 5th October 1943. VIII/355/3. CONFIDENTIAL. SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL NO. 7.  Not an Array Establishment WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79/W.E./6718 S.D.3j.  i Personnel. President lieutenant-colonel 1 Deputy president major 1 Military testing officers captains 3 Adjutant and quarter-master a 1 Psychologists - Captain 1 Subaltern 1 Specialist psychiatrists Majors R.A.M.C. 2 Total officers. 10 Serjeants - Intelligence Corps. 1 Infantry 1 Administrative duties 1 Testers 3 Total serjeants. 6 Clerks R.A.S.C. 5 Cooks A.C.C. for - Officers' mess 1 Other ranks' mess 1 Students' mess 2 Drivers I.C. 2 Batmen 5 General dutymen 3 Mess Orderlies for - Officers' mess 1 Serjeants' mess 1 Rank and file mess 1 Students' mess 2 Motor cyclist 1 Storemen non-technical 2 Total rank and file. b 27 Total other ranks. 33 Total special training school No. 7.  43 Thies establishment supersedes W.E. No. VIII/355/2.  M.920/2, 89.  il Transport. Motor-cycle solo Car 2-seater Truck 15-cwt. 4x2 4x2 G.S. 1 1 1  aj If a combatant officer will be a subaltern  b Includes 2 corporals and 2 lance-corporals. NOTE. All administrative personnel of tnis establisinment may be of low medical category., APPENDIX 1 d . Notified in A.C.Is. 27th October 1943. Effective date 30th September 1943. VII1/550/1. CONFIDENTIAL.  SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL NO. 21. CNot an Army Establishment'  WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79/W.E ./7716 S. DTsT  i Personnel. Commandant lieutenant-colonel- 1 Chief instructor major 1 Instructors - Captains. 4 Lieutenant. 1 Administrative officer captain 1 Adjutant and quartermaster a 1 Medical Officer R.A.M.C. major captain or lieutenant 1 Total officers. 10 Regimental quarter-master-serjeant 1 Total warrant officers. 1 Assistant instructors staff-serjeants -  R.E. 1 R.Signals. 1 Infantry. 1 Company-quarter-master-serjeant. 1 A.P.T.C. instructor. 1 Armourer serjeant R.E.M.E. 1 Clerk R.A.S.C. 1 Duty Serjeant. 1 Vehicle mechanic R.A.S.C. 1 Cook A.C.C. for rank and file mess 1 Total Staff-serjeants and serjeants. 10 Nursing orderly R.A.M.C. Corporal 1 Clerks includes 1 shorthand-typist 2 Batmen 3 Butchery dutyman 1 Cooks A.C.C. for - Officers mess 1 Serjeants mess 1 Rank and file mess 3 Orderlies for - Officers' mess 2 Serjeants' mess 1 Rank and file mess 3 Drivers I.C. R.A.S.C. includes a corporal 6 Motor-cyclist orderly 1 Sanitary dutyman. 1 Storeman. 1 General dutymen may be unfit for general service 13 Total rank and file b 40 Total other ranks '51 Total S.T.S. No.21. 61, 91.   il Transport.  Motor-cycles solo 4 Motor-cycles combination 2 Cars 2-seater 4x2 2 Car 4-seater 4x2 1 Trucks 15-cwt 4x2 G.S. 2   a If a combatant officer will be subaltern.  b Includes 1 corporal and 3 lance-corporals in addi tion to tne ranks specifically allotted., 92.  APPENDIX 1 d Notified in A.C.Is. 27th October 1943. Effective date 30th September 1943. VIII/551/1. CONFIDENTIAL. SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL NO.22.  Not an Army EstablishmentJ WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79/W.E./7717 S.D.3 .  i Personnel. Commandant and chief instructor major 1 Instructors Captains or subalterns 2 Adjutant and quarter-master a 1 Total officers. 4 Company quarter-master-serjeants 1 Assistant instructors serjeants -  R.E. 1 R. Signals 1 Infantry 1 A.P.T.C. Instructor 1 Total staff-serjeants and 5 serjeants. Duty corporal 1 Clerk 1 Batmen 2 Cooks A.C.C. for - Officers mess 1 Serjeants mess 1 Rank and file mess includes a corporal 3 Orderlies for - Officers' mess 1 Serjeants mess 1 Rank and file mess 2 Drivers I.C. R.A.S.C. 2 Sanitary dutyman 1 Storeman 1 General dutymen 7 Total rank and file b 24 Total other ranks. 29 Total Special Training School No. 22. 33,  il Transport.  Motor-cycle solo 1 Car 4-seater 4x2 1 Truck 15-cwt 4x2 G.S. 1  a If a combatant officer will be a subaltern.  b Includes 1 corporal and 2 lance-corporals in addition to the ranks specifically allotted. NOTE.  All personnel of this establishment excpet Instructional staff may be of low medical category., APPEMDIX 1 d Notified in A.C.Is 27th October 1943. Effective date 30th September 1943. VII1/552/1  CONFIDENTIAL. SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL NO. 23. fNot an Army Establishment WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79/W.E./7718 S.D.3  i Personnel. Commandant and chief instructor Major 1 Instructors - Captains or subalterns 2 Adjutant and quartermaster a JL Total officers.  4 Company quartsr-master-serjeant 1 Assistant instructors serjeants -  R.E. 2 R. Signals. 1 Infantry 1 A.P.T.C. Instructor. 1 Total staff-serjeants and serjeants. 7 Duty corporal 1 Clerk 1 Batmen 2 Cooks A.C.C. for - Officers' mess 1 Serjeants' mess 1 Rank and file mess includes a corporal 4 Orderlies for - Officers' mess 1 Serjeants' mess 1 Rank and file mess 6 Driver I.C. R.A.S.C. 1 Sanitary dutymen. 2 Storemen 2 General dutymen. 9 Total rank and file. b 32 Total other ranks. 39 Total special training school No. 23. 43  a If a combatant officer will be a subaltern.  b Includes 1 corporal and 3 lance-corporals in addition to the ranks specifically allotted. NOTE. All personnel of this establishment except in structional staff may be of low medical category., 95  ii Transport Car 2-seater 4x2. \  -  m, 96. APPENDIX 1 d . Notified in A.C.Is. 27th October 1943. Effective date 30th September 1943. VII1/553/1. CONFIDENTIAL. SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL NO. 24.  Not an Army Establishment WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79/W.E./7719/S.D.3 .  I Personnel. Commandant and chief instructor major 1 Instructors captains or subalterns 3 Adjutant and quartermaster a 1 Total officers. 5 Company quarter-master-serjeant 1 Assistant instructors serjeants -  R.E. 2 R. Signals. 1 Infantry 2  A.P.T.C. Instructor. 1 Total staff-serjeants and serjeants J7 Duty corporal 1 Clerks 2 Batmen 3 Cooks A.C.C. for Officers' mess 1 Serjeants' mess 1 Rank and file mess includes a corporal 6 Orderlies for - Officers' mess 1 Serjeants' mess 1 Rank and file mess 6 Motor-cyclist orderly 1 Sanitary dutymen 2 Storeman 2 General dutymen 14 Total rank and file b 41 Total other ranks 48 Total special training school. No.24. 53  ii Transport Motor-cycle combination 1  a If a combatant officer will be a subaltern.  b Includes 1 corporal and 3 lance-corporals in addition to the ranks specifically allotted.  NOTE. All personnel of this establishment except the instructional staff may be of low medical category., , 98.  APPENDIX 1 d . Notified In A.C.Is. 27th October 1943. Effective date 30th September 1943. VII1/554/1 CONFIDENTIAL. SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL NO. 25.  Not an Army Establishment . WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79/W.E./7720 S.D.3 .  1 Pe rs onne1. Commandant and chief instructor major 1 Instructors - Captains or subalterns 4 Adjutant and quartemaster a 1 Total officers. 6 Company quarter-master-serjeant 1 Assistant instructors serjeants -  R.E. 2 Infant ry 2  A.P.T.C. Instructors. 2 Total staff-serjeants and serjeants 7 Duty Corporals 2 Clerks 2 Batmen 3 Cooks A.C.C. for - Officers mess 1 Serjeants mess 1 Rank and file mess includes a corporal 6 Orderlies for - Officers mess 1 Serjeants mess 1 Rank and file mess 6 Drivers I.C. R.A.S.C. 2 Motor-cyclist orderly 1 Sanitary dutyman 1 Storeman 1 General dutymen 9 Total rank and file b 57 Total other ranks 44 Total special training school No. 25. 50  a If a combatant officer will be a subaltern.  b Includes 1 corporal and 3 lance-corporals in addition to the ranks specifically allotted.  NOTE. All personnel of this establishment except in structional staff may be of low medical category.,  ii Transport. Motor-cycle solo 1 Motor-cycle combination 1 Car 4-seater 4x2 1 Truck 15-cwt. 4x2 G.S. 1 \, 100  APPENDIX 1 e Notified in A.C.Is. 4th November 1942. Effective date -20th October 1942. VIII/240/2. SECURITY. SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL NO. 51.  Not an army establishment . HOME WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79/W.E./5610 S.D.5J Detail Commandant and chief instructor  major 1 1 Instructors - Captains 1 1 2 Lieutenant 1 1 Administrative officers subalterns 1 1 2 Total officers 4 2 6 Company quarter-master-serjeant 1 1 Duty serjeant 1 1 II Total staff-serjeants and serjeant s. 1 1 2 Assistant instructors 2Sjts. and 2Cpls 22 4 Clerks R.A.S.C. includes a Cor poral 31 4 Batmen includes 3 for student officers 3 2 5 Drivers I.C. R.A.S.C. includes a lance-corporal 4 4 8 Motor-cyclist orderly 1 1 Sanitary dutyman 1 1 2 Storemen 1 1 2 Gene ral dutymen 2 2 4 Regimental police includes 1 corporal and 1 lance-corporal 7 5 12 Mess orderlies for - Officers' mess 3 2 5 Students' messes 1 1 2 Other ranks' mess 1 . 1 2 Total rank and file 29 22 51 Total other ranks 30 23 53 Total special train ing school No. 51. 34 25 59  Special trainingschool No. 51a Special trainings choo1 No. 51b. Total specialtraining school No. 51., Detail. Attached. A.P.T.C. -Instructors. A.C.C. -Cooks for - Officers' Students' R.A.M.C. Rank and file Mess -Nursing orderlies. 2 1 Total attached. Total special training school No. 51 Including  attached 39  11 Transport Motor-cycles solo 1T Cars 2-seater 4x2 1 Trucks 15-cwt 4x2 G.S. 2 This establishment supersedes VIII/240/1. faQ IG rH   lO fei  pH o iz Jj rH  O  OO u -G  ft o  0m 29 W.E. No. rH O cd o  'ft X oo 03 03 ft 03 bOr- G rH G  cd ft -p cd  OG Eh -P 2 2 3 2 68  IT 3 3 to 5 Cd G I  1 iO aS Sh Eh O i1 Cd rH  H O O O  D 3ft O  Z 03 1 Mess Mess 1, 102.  APPENDIX 1 f . Notified in A.C.I.s. 16th February 1944. Effective date 5th February 1944. VII1/207/3. CONFIDENTIAL. SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL. NO. 31.  Not an Army Establishment HOME WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79/W.E./4029 S.D.3  i Personnel. Commandant lieutenant-colonel 1 Second-in-command major 1 Administrative officer captain 1 Instructors - Majors 2 Captains 18 Liaison officer captain 1 Total officers. 24 Instructor A.P.T.C. 1 Company quarter-master-serjeant 1 Duty Serjeant 1 Total staff-serjeants & serjeants. 3 Clerks includes 1 corporal 3 Batmen 8 Cooks A.C.C. for - Officers' mess 1 Rank and file mess includes a corporal 3 Orderlies for - Officers' mess includes 1 corporal 2 Rank and file mess 3 Drivers I.C. R.A.S.C. includes 1 corporal 10 Driver-mechanic 1 Motor-cyclist orderly 1 Sanitary dutyman 1 Storeman 1 General dutymen may be unfit for general service 6 Total rank and file a 40 Total other ranks. 43 Total special training school No.31. 67  ii Transport. Motor-cycle solo 1 Cars 2-seater 4x2 2 Cars 4-seater 4x2 5 Truck 15-cwt 4x2 G.S. 1  a Includes 1 lance-corporal. This establishment supersedes W.E. No. VIIl/207/2 being a rewrite incorporating amendments 1 to 3., , APPENDIX 1 f .  Notified in A.C.Is 27th October 1943. Effective date 30th September 1943. VII1/544/1.  CONFIDENTIAL.  SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL NO. 32.  Not an Army Establishment .  WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79/W.E./7692 S.D.3 .   I Personnel.  Commandant captain 1  Total officers 1  Company quarter-master-serjeant. 1  Total staff serjeants. 1  Corporal 1 Clerk 1 Batmen 4 Cooks A.C.C. for - Officers mess. 3 Rank and file mess. 1 Orderlies for - Officers' mess Rank and file mess 1 Driver I.C. R.A.S.C. 1 Motor-cyclist orderly 1 Storeman and sanitary dutyman 1 General dutymen 2  Total rank and file a 19  Total other ranks 20  Total special training school No. 32. 21   ii Transport.  Motor-cycle solo 1 Car 2-seater 4x2 1  NOTE.  All personnel of this establishment may be of low medical category.   a Includes 3 lance-corporals, , 106  APPENDIX 1 f .  Notified in A.C.Is 27th October 1943. Effective date 30th September 1943. VII1/545/1.  CONFIDENTIAL.  SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL NO. 33.  Not an Army Establishment  WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79/W.E./7693 STdYsI   i Personnel.  Commandant captain 1  Total officers 1  Company quarter-master-serjeant 1  Total staff-serjeants 1  Corporal 1 Clerk 1 Batmen 3 Cooks A.C.C. for - Officers' mess 1 Rank and file mess 1 Orderlies for - Officers' mess 1 Rank and file mess 1 Driver I.C. R.A.S.C. 1 Motor-cyclist orderly 1 Storeman and sanitary dutyman 1 General dutymen 2  Total rank and file a 14  Total other ranks 15  Total special training school No. 33. 16   ii Transport.  Motor-cycle solo 1 Car 2-seater 4x2 1   a Includes 3 lance-corporals.  NOTE.  All personnel of this establishment may be of low medical category., , APPENDIX 1 f .  Notified in A.C.Is. 27th October 1943. Effective date 30th September 1943. VIIl/546/1. CONFIDENTIAL.  SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL NO. 34.  Not an Army Establishment].  WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79/W.E./7694/ S.D.3 '   i Personnel.  Commandant Captain 1  Total officers. 1  Company quarter-master-serjeant. 1  Total staff-serjeants. 1  Corporal 1 Clerk 1 Batmen 4 Cooks A.C.C. for - Officers mess 1 Rank and file mess 1 Orderlies for - Officers mess 1 Rank and file mess 1 Driver I.C. R.A.S.C. 1 Motor-cyclist orderly 1 Storeman and sanitary dutyman 1 General dutymen 2  Total rank and file. a 15  Total other ranks 16  Total special training school No. 34. 17   ii Transport.  Motor-cycle solo 1 Car 2-seater 4x2 1   a Includes 3 lance-corporals.  NOTE.  All personnel of this establishment may be of low medical category., , 110  APPENDIX 1 f .  Notified in A.C.Is 27th October 1943. Effective date 30th September 1943. VIII/547/1.  CONFIDENTIAL.  SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL NO. 55. TNot an Army Establishment .  WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79/W.E./7695/ S .D.Sj.   i Personnel.  Commandant captain 1  Total officers. 1  Company quarter-master-serjeant. 1  Total staff-serjeants. 1  Corporal 1 Clerk 1 Batmen 3 Cooks A.C.C. for - Officers mess 1 Rank and file mess 1 Orderlies for - Officers' mess 1 Rank and file mess 1 Drivers I.C. R.A.S.C. 1 Storeman and sanitary dutyman 1 General dutymen 2 Motor-cyclist orderly 1  Total rank and file. a 14  Total other ranks. 15  Total special training school No. 35. 16   ii Transport.  Motor-cycle solo 1 Car 2-seater 4x2 1   a Includes 3 lance-corporals.  NOTE.  All personnel of this establishment may be of low medical category., , , , 114.  APPENDIX 1 f  Notified in A.C.Is. 27th October 1943. Effective date 30th September 1943. VII1/549/1.  CONFIDENTIAL.  SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL NO.57.  Not an Army Establishment .  WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79/W.E./7697 S.D.3 .   i Personnel.  Commandant captain 1 Instructor captain 1  Total officers. 2  Company quarter-master-serjeant 1 Duty serjeant 1 Assistant instructors R.E. serjeants 2  Total staff-serjeants and serjeants. 4  Clerk 1 Batmen 4 Cooks A.C.C. for - Officers' mess Rank and file mess 2 Orderlies for - Officers' mess 1 Rank and file mess 2 Driver I.C. R.A.S.C. 1 Motor-cyclist orderly 1 Storeman and sanitary dutyman 1 General dutyman 4  Total rank and file a 18  Total other ranks. 22  Total special training school No. 37. 24   ii Transport.  Motor-cycle solo 1 Car 2-seater 4x2 1   a Includes 3 lance-corporals.  NOTE.  All personnel of this establishment except the instructional staff may be of low medical category., , 116.  APPENDIX Kp .  Notified in A.C.Is 9th December 1942. Effective date -23rd November 1942. VIII/314/2. SECURITY.  SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL NO.17.  Not an Army Establishment .  HOME WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79/W.E./5828 S.D.3T   i Personnel.  Commandant and chief instructor  lieutenant-colonel 1 Administrative officer captain 1 Instructors - Major 1 Captains 5 Liexitenants 2  Total officers 10  Company quarter-master-serjeant 1 Assistant instructors serjeants a -   R.E. 1  R. Signals. 1 Infantry 1  A.P.T.C. 1  Total staff-serjeants and serjeants  Clerks R.A.S.C. includes a shorthand-typist 3 Cooks A.C.C. incLudes 1 Corporal 4 Mess orderlies 5 Drivers I.C. R.A.S.C. includes a drivermechanic 6 Motor-cyclist orderly 1 Storeman 1 Batmen 8 Regimental Police 4 General dutymen 3 Sanitary dutyfnan 1  Total rank and file b 36  Total other ranks. 41  Total special training school No. 17 51   ii Transport.  Motor-cycle solo 1 Car 2-seater 4x2 1 Cars 4-seater 4x2 3 Trucks 15-cwt 4x2 G.S. 2   a Includes a. staff-serjeant.   b Includes 2 corporals and 2 lance-corporals.,  lii Weapons. Pistols .38-inch 14 Rifles .308-inch 39  This establishment supersedes W.E. VIII/314/1, APPENDIX 1 h .  Notified in A.C.Is. 5th May 1943. Effective date -22nd April 1943. VII1/465/1.  SECURITY.  SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL NO.39.  Not an Army Establishment .  HOME WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79./W.E./6609 S.D.3 .   I Personnel.  Commandant and chief instructor major 1 Instructors captains 3 Administrative officer subaltern 1  Total officers.  5  Assistant instructor R.E. serjeant 1 Serjeant administrative duties 1 Clerks R.A.S.C. 3 Batmen for - Officers 1 Student officers. 4  A.C.C. -Cooks for - Officers' mess 1 Other ranks' mess 1 Students'mess 1 Mess Orderlies for - Officers' mess 1 Other ranks' mess 1 Students' mess 1 Drivers I.C. R.A.S.C. Sanitary dutyman 1 Storeman non-technical 1 General dutymen 3  Total other ranks.  a 25  Total special training school No. 39. 28   ii Transport.  Car 2-seater 4x2. 1 Truck 15-cwt. 4x2 G.S. 1   iii Weapons.  Pistols .38-inch 5 Rifles .303-inch 11 Machine carbines Sten 9mm. 11   a Includes 2 corporals and 2 lance-corporals.  NOTE. All personnel of this establishment except instruc tional staff may be of low medical category., , 120  APPENDIX 1 1 .  Notified in A.C.Is. 1st March 1944. Effective date -29th February 1944. VII1/650/1. CONFIDENTIAL. SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOLS NOS. 2. 5. 5. AND 6 EACH .  Not an Army Establishment . WAR establishment. 79/W.E./8497 3.D.3 . Detail. Officers.  Staff-serjeanteandSerjeants.  Corporals.  Privates.  Total specialtraining school  Nos. 2 3 5 & 6  each Commandant and chief instructor major 1 1 Adjutant and quarter-master  if a combatant will be a' subaltern 1 1 Instructors captains or subalterns 2 2 Assistant instructors - R.E. 1 1 Infantry 2 2 Instructor A.P.T.C. 1 ' 1 Company quarter-masterserjeant. 1 1 Batman 1 1 Clerks 2 2 Cooks A.C.C. for - Officers' mess. 1 1 Serjeants' mess 1 1 Rank and file mess 1 2 3 Drivers I.C. R.A.S.C. 2 2 General dutymen. 66 Motor-cyclist 1 1 Orderlies for - Officers' mess Serjeants' mess 1 1 1 1 1 Rank and file mess 3 3 Sanitary dutyman 1 1 Storeman 1 1 Total special training schools. Nos. 2 3 5 & 6 each 4 5 1 323 33 /  Includes 1 corporal and 2 lance-corporals.,  ii Transport. Motor-cycle solo 1 Car 2-seater 4x2. 1 Truck 15-cwt. 4x2 G.S. 1   2 in case of STS 3 and 5 . All personnel of this establishment with the exception of the instructors and assistant instructors may be of low medical category., APPENDIX 1 1 . Notified in A.C.Is. 16th February 1944. Effective date 5th February 1944. VII1/205/3. CONFIDENTIAL. SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOLS. NOS. 41. 42 and 44 to 46.  Not an Array Establishment . HOME WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79/W.E./4031 S.D.3  i Personnel. Detail. Commandant and chief instructor major 1 1 Adjutant and quarter-master  if a combatant officer will be a subaltern 1 1 Instructors captains or Lieutenants 2 2 Company quarter-master serjeant . 1 1 Assistant instructors -  R.E. 11 R. Signals. 1 1 Infantry weapon training 1 1 A.P.T.C. 1 1 Clerks 1 1 Batmen 2 2 Cooks A.C.C. for - Officers' mess 1 1 Rank and file mess 1 2 3 Orderlies for - Officers' mess 1 1 Serjeants' mess 1 1 Rank and file mess 3' 3 Drivers I.C. R.A.S.C. 3 3 Motor-cyclist orderly 1 1 Regimental police. 1 6 7 Sanitary dutyman 1 1 Storeman 1 1 General dutymen may be unfit for general service 6 6 Total special training schools 41 42 and 44 to 46. 4 5 2 30 41 Officers.  Staff-serjeants& serjeants.  Corporals. Privates. Total special  training schools Nos. 41 42 & 44 to 46.  Includes 1 corporal and 2 lance corporals, 123.  ii Transport. Motor-cycle solo 1 Car 2-seater 4x2. 1 Trucks 15-cwt 4x2. 2 This establishment supersedes W.E. No. VIIl/205/2 being a re-write incorporating amendments 1 and 2. NOTES. 1. Additions to this establishment are authorized as below for each increase of 50 above 95 1 Cook . 1 Orderly for rank and flle mess 3 Regimental police. 3 General dutymen includes 1 lance   corporal . 2. With the exception of the instructors and the assis tant instructors all personnel of this establishment may be of low medical category. s /, 124.  APPENDIX I .1 .  Notified in A.C.Is. 26th January 1944. Effective date 13th January 1944.  CONFIDENTIAL.  SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL NO. 40.  Not an Array Establishment  WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79/W.E./7562 S.D.3 .   i Personnel.  Commandant major 1 Instructors - Captains 2 Subalterns 2  Total officers.  5  Company quarter-master-serjeant. 1 Assistant instructors - Serjeants R. Signals operators wireless and line 2  Total staff-serjeants and serjeants 3  Batmen 9 Clerks R.A.S.C. includes 1 corporal and 1 lance-corporal -4 Drivers I.C. 6 General dutymen 4 Instrument mechanic R. Signals. 1 Motor-cyclist. 1 Storeman non-technical. 1 Orderlies for - Officers' mess 2 Other ranks' mess 1 Students' mess 1  Total rank and file. 30  Total other ranks. 55  Total special training school No. 40 38  Attached -   A.C.C. -Cooks for - Officers' mess 2 Other ranks' mess 1 Students' mess 1  Total special training school No. 40 including attached  42  NOTE.  All personnel of this establishment with the exception of instructional staff may be of low medical category.  This establishment supersedes W.E. No. VIIl/532/1,  ii Transport Motor-cycle solo Cars 2-seater 4x2 Trucks 15-cwt 4x2 G.S., APPENDIX I k 1. Notified in A.C.I.s 3rd November 1943. Effective date 19th October 1943. VIII/570/2. WAR KSTaBLISHiviENT M.E. 65. 79/W.E./7775S.D.3. Commandant lieutenant colonel 1 General staff officer 2nd grade 1 Major 1 Chief instructor major 1 Company commanders majors 3 Adjutant captain 1 Instructors captains or subalterns 21 Instructor R. Signals captain 1 Quartermaster 1 Total officers. 31 Regimental serjeant-major 1 Regimental quarter-master-serjeant 1 Clerk R.A.S.C. W.O. Class II 1 Company quarter-master-serjeants. 3 Assistant instructors - Infantry serjeants 21 R. Signals serjeants 3 A.P.T.C. 1 Armourer serjeant R.E.M.E. 1 Duty Serjeants 4 Instrument mechanic R. Signals serjeant 1 Clerk R.A.S.C. serjeant 1 Serjeant i/c vechicles R.A.S.C. 1 Officers' mess steward 1 Serjeants' mess caterer 1 Total warrant officer staff-serjeants 41 and serjeants. Lance-serjeants 3 Corporals 9 Lance-corporals 14 Privates 123 Total rank and file 149 Total other ranks 190 Total M.E. 65. 221 Attached -  A.C.C. -cooks for - Officers' mess 2 Serjeants' mess 2 Rank and file mess includes 1 corporal 4 Students' messes 7 Total attached 15 Total M.E. 65 including attached 236, 127.  il Distribution of rank and file by trades and duties.  Tradesmen -   Carpenter and jqiner R.E.M.E.  Clerks R.A.S.C.  Driver-mechanics R.A.S.C.  Storeman technical trained in wireless duties  Total tradesmen.  Non-tradesmen 48   Batmen  21   Drivers I.C. General dutymen 14 Medical officers' orderly lance   corporal 1 Motor-cyclist orderlies 2 Orderlies for - Officers' mess 2 Serjeants' mess 1 Rank and file mess 4 Students messes 22 Regimental police Sanitary dutymen Storemen non-technical 4 4 7 Total non-tradesmen 130  Total rank and file 149   iii Transport. Motor-cycles solo 2 Cars 2-seater 4x2 14 Trucks 15-cwt. 4x2 G.S. 4 Lorries 3-ton 4x2 G.S. 4 Lorries 3-ton 4x2 troop carrying. 3  NOTE.  All personnel of this establishment except the instructional staff may be of low medical category., %  128.  APPENDIX I k 11.  Notified in A.C.I.s. 7th March 1945. Effective date 22nd February 1945. VII1/570/2  CONFIDENTIAL.  MILITAKI ESTABLISHMENT NO. 65. CNot an Amy establishment  WAR ESTABLISHMENT. 79/W.E./7775 S.D.3   i Personnel.  Commandant major 1 Adjutant and quarter-master a 1 Administrative officer captains. 1 Instructors 4  Total officers 7  Regimental quarter-master-serjeant 1  Clerk R.A.S.C. warrant officer Class ID 1  Assistant instructors  R.E. 2  serjeants.   Infantry 3 Instructor A.P.T.C. 1 Duty N.C.O. serjeant 1 Officers' mess steward serjeant 1  Total warrant officers and serjeants. 10  Clerks Includes 1 corporal 4  Drivers I.C. 3  A.C.C. cooks for - Officers' mess 3 Serjeants' mess 1 Other ranks' mess 2 Students' mess 2 Orderlies for - Medical officer lance-corporal 1 Officers' mess 1 Serjeants' mess 1 Students' mess 3 Batmen 8 General dutymen includes 1 corporal 7 Storemen non-technical Includes 1 corporal 4 Sanitary dutymen 2  Total rank and file.  b 42  Total other ranks.  52  Total military establishment. No. 65. 59   a If a combatant officer will be a subaltern.   b Of the total privates 4 may be lance-corporals including the medical officer's orderly., 129.  ii Transport. Car 4x2 light utility 1. Trucks 3-ton 4x2 2. NOTE. V 11 - With the exception of all instructional staff officers will be of a medical category lower than A and other ranks will be of a medical category lower than Al if available. This establishment supersedes W.E. No. VIIl/570/l. / /, APPENDIX I k 111. VII1/570/2. MILITARY ESTABLISHMENT NO. 65.  Not an Army Establishment .  Designed to train 56 personnel to hold 197 personnel and to administer a paper strength of 200 personnel WAR ESTABLISHMENT.  i Personnel. Commandant and chief instructor major 1 Instructors -major 1 captains 5 Administrative officer 1 Adjutant and quartermaster 1 Total officers 9 Company serjeant-major 1 Company quartermaster-serjeant 1 Assistant instructors -  R.E. staff-serjeants 3 Any arm staff-serjeants 1  R. Signals 1 A.P.T.C. 1 Armourer 1 Clerk 1 Officers' mess steward 1 Serjeants' mess caterer JL Total Warrant officers staff-serjeants and serjeants. JL2 Batmen 4 Clerks includes 1 corporal and 1 lancecorporal- 6 Drivers I.C. 3 Motor cyclists. 2 General dutymen including orderlies for - Medical officer includes 2 corporals and Officer's mess 2 lance-corporals. Serjeant's mess 20 Sanitary dutymen 2 Storemen technical 1 Storemen 4 Cooks A.C.C. for - Officers' mess 1 Serjeants' mess 2 Other ranks mess includes 1 corporal 6 Total other ranks 50 Total rank and file 62 Total military establishment No. 65. 71,  11 Transport. Motor cycles solo 2 Car 4x2 light utility 1 Lorries 3 ton 4x2 G.S. 2 NOTh. Personnel on this establishment may be of any army except where otherwise stated or may be Naval or R.A.F. personnel of equivalent rank. /, 132. APPENDIX 1 1 .  SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL NO. 47.  WAR ESTABLISHMENT.  See Appendix 1 1 'SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOLS NOS. 41 42 and 44 to 46 page 122 with the following amendments  Under ' 11 Transport' add Lorry 3-ton 4x4 troop carrying  1   This amendment will take effect from 3rd August 1944  Under ' 1 Personnel' delete Instructors  add for subs captains or lieutenants Instuctors  captains Assistant instructor - R.E. - serjeant titute Assistant instructor - R.E. - staff-serjeant 2 2 1 1  This amendment will take effect from 15th February 1945. Under add ' i Personnel' Assistant instructor Infantry  weapon training Staff Serjeant 1  This amendment will take effect from 1st February 1945 I, , APPENDIX I m . VII1/650/1. CONFIDENTIAL. SPECIAL TRAINING SCHOOL NO. 2.  Not an Amy Establishment WAR ESTABLISHMENT.  Detail.  Commandant major Adjutant & Quartermaster  subaltern if combatant Subalterns  Instructor A.P.T.C. Company Quarter Master Serjeant Batman Clerks Cooks A.C.C. for - Officers' mess Serjeants' mess Rank and file mess . Drivers. I.C. R.A.S.C. General dutymen Motor cyclist Orderlies for - Officers' mess Rank and file mess Sanitary dutymen Storeman  Guards -Serjeants Corporals L/Corporals Privates  Total  Officers.   Staff-serjeant   and serjeant   Corporals   Privates   Total spe   cial train ing school No. 2.  11  11 22  11  11 1 11 22  11 11 12 3 33 66 11  11 33 11 11  44 55 44 33 33  4 6 6 60 76  l   Includes 1 Corporal and 2 L/Cpls.  NOTE. All personnel of this establishment may be of low medical category.,   /  135 Transport Motor cycle solo Car 2 seater 4x2 Truck 15 cwt. 4x2 GS 1 1 2 /, 136. APPE NDIX 11 a . Form T.2. Party S.T.3. No. PHELIMINAKST REPORT.  To be submitted at end of Preliminary Training in duplicate to S.T.S. H.Q. and third copy to Para- Military school School No. Name by whichknown. Grade. The following standard and ability has been obtained in training at S.T.S. No. 1. Physical Training. Stamina and agility fair. Physical develop ment good. Being a hard worker this student will undoubtedly improve with continual training. Rope climbing progressing. 2. Fieldcraft. Shows keenness and aptitude. 3. Weapon Training. A bit slow but is improving. 4. Explosives and Demolitions. Keen and quick to learn. 89 in test. 5. Signalling and Communications. Seems interested. Sending Sw.p.m. Receiving 4w.p.m. 6. Reports. Accurate and intelligent. He is able to realize what is important.  7. Map Reading etc. Excellent 100 in test. 8. Riding or Driving.  a Bicycle.  b Motor Cycle.  c Motor Car. 9. Any Special Training with particulars, 137 Instructors Remarks s-  A very good average student. He is full of confidence. Quick and intelligent. Commandant's Report A type that while not good enough for an organizer is quite confident and should make a good instructor. Date Signed O.C., 138. APPENDIX 11 b S.T.S. 7. Course No. Student No Name S.A.B. Report. I. General Ap ent Grading Personality incl. Gen Intelligence . Outstanding A Good B Above Average -   Below Average c -  Low but pass D Fail F II. Intelligence Bating included in I above Mentally dull 1  Intermediate 2 Ratings 3 4 Average Intelligence -5  Intermediate 6 Ratings CD 8 Superior 9 Intelligence III Aptitude Gradings  a Morse Pass Good Pass Average  FaT  b Mechanical Aptitude GoodT Average Poor  c Instructional Ability Good Average Poor NOTE. Aptitude Gradings are purely technical grad ings taking no account of the students per sonality or general intelligence., 139. Remarks.  This candidate has a genuine wish to serve his country by getting into active work in the Maquis.  He is aggressive persistent and quick in his reactions. Ido not think he will tolerate inacti vity for long. He is conscientious.  In action he was energetic and showed initiative and enterprise in seizing a chance opportunity. As a leader he speaks in a direct way and inspires con fidence and gives quite a good performance without brilliance.  He should do well as an officer in the Maquis.  PRESIDENT.   DATE, 140. APPENDIX 11 c Form T.H.S.5. PARA-MILITARY REPORT. S.T.S. No Party.... School No Name by which known. Grade. The following standard and ability has been obtained in training at S.T.S. No. 1. Physical Training. Good tries very hard. In fairly good condition. 2. Close Combat. Aggressive and keen but requires more practice. 3. Rope Work. Good very strong in the arms. 4. Fieldcraft. Makes use of the ground to good advantage and shows an intelligent understanding of the principles of this subject. 5. Weapon Training. --A fast-and accurate shot who only requires practice to keep him up to the high standard he has attained whilst at this school. 6. Explosives and Demolitions. Has v/orked well throughout shown great in terest done good practical work and appears to have a good general knowledge of all phases of this training. 7. Signalling and Communications. Reads 5 w.p.m. Sends 5 w.p.m. Very irregular. 8. Reports. With further practice will have mastered this subject. Understands what is required and combines . neatness with accuracy. 9. Map Reading. Has a good all-round knowledge and his written work is very neat and business like. 10. Schemes and Tactics. As a leader he shows promise being able to form a practical and workable plan and keep con trol throughout the operation. 11. Boat Work. Nil. 12. Navigation. Nil., 141. 13. Special Training giving particulars Appreciations and Orders. Understands this subject fairly well and rea sons logically. His orders were well given and he obviously knew what this subject called for. Instructors Remarks -  A quiet intelligent type of student who has shown considerable interest throughout the course and has worked hard consistently at all subjects. Commandant's Report -  Perhaps the most level headed .student of the course who with revision and further training should make a competent instructor. A good type and a highly satis factory student. Date Signed O.C. Forwarded with further remarks if necessary Date Signed Commandant Group A., 142  APPENDIX 11 d . PARACHUTE TRAINING HEIGHT -MG-T SACHET. No. of students. Date of arrival.. Section. Date of departure Accompanying Officer Accommodated at.. F.S.P. Training. . . .Land. PARACHUTE DESCENTS. Weather or other Time Date Aircraft Height Conditions. No. 1 L4.30 15/8/44 Aircraft 700ft. Perfect con ditions . Slow pairs. No.2 L2.30 16/8/44 Aircraft 600ft. Wind 5. Sticks of 5. No. 3 16.00 16/8/44 Aircraft 600ft. Wind 5. Fine. Slow pairs. Kit bags. No.4 22.00 17/8/44 Night 700ft. Wind 3. Balloon Solo. ADDITIONAL DESCENTS. .A quiet and unassuming type who started slowly but picked up his training well. He was re liable and was most willing and enthusiastic in his quiet way. No undue nervousness was noted and there was no hesitation in the aircraft. His actual jum ping was good and he is a good parachute risk. He received lectures on containers and disposal and on reception committee working. FOUR DESCENTS. FIRST CLa S, .This student was very eager to do well throughout his training but has very little control over his body. Throughout his ground training he was very clumsy. On his first descent from aircraft he bruised his back but this did not prevent him from continuing with his training. On his third descent he injured his leg and did not make a fourth descent. He made three descents by day from aircraft one with leg bag THHEE DESCENTS. THIRD CLAES. .Aman who tried hard but the harder he tried the more he hurt himself. He tried to use force and not co-ordination but gradually improved. Some slight ankle injury was noted and he was treated for this. It did not affect his actual jumping and in some respects he was lucky but he would have a good chance of making a safe landing under good con ditions. He received lectures on containers and disposal and on reception committee working. FOUR DESCENTS. SECOND CLASS. .Aman who has no fears or apprehension regarding parachuting -he did all his ground train ing with complete confidence although some of his ac tions were at times a little unco-ordinated. He made four descents one by night and with the exception of one he made good landings. He could be relied upon to jump safely under reasonable conditions. He re ceived lectures on containers and disposal and on re ception committee working. FOUR DESCENTS.' SECOND CLASS. .Hewas slightly nervous at first which affected his performance on the training appara tus but became more confident on his second attempt. He improved gradually throughout the course and ap peared happy towards the end. He made four descents one by night and with the exception of the first all were satisfactory. He received lectures on containers and disposal and on reception committee working. FOUR DESCENTS. SECOND CLaSS . REMARKS. A good average party all of a type as regards physical fitness age etc. All entered with quiet application into the ground training and succeeded in completing the course with the exception of Lieut. Jones. Well disciplined and correct. I, 144. APPENDIX 11 e . FINISHING REPORT. Form T.4. Party No. 22. S.T.S. 34. Particulars of Finishing Course j-3 weeks . NAME BY V/HICH KNOWN. SEPOKT. He is intelligent but practical rather than academic. He is not particularly quick but has plenty of common sense. His imagination and ini tiative are fair. In character he is solid and straight-forward self-confident and appears re liable. He has a quiet unassuming personality but is an interesting and pldasant companion. While he took an interest in the course and showed intelligence and ability tnis officer is anxious for an active job and should be well suited for a job of the para-military type. CODES. Taught Innocent Letter based on Playfair Double Transposition and Letter One-time Pad. Has a fair understanding of the principles taught. Lt.Col. Date. Commandant B. Group. i \, , 146. APPENDIX 11 f . Form T.H.S.4. FINISHING REPORT.  To be submitted in duplicate to S.T.S. H.Q . S.T.S. No....17. Party.... Name by which known. School No Grade. Particulars of Finishing Training given Standard basic course in Industrial Sabotage including Steam and Hydro-Electric Power-  Stations Transmission Systems Engineering Factories Steam and Electric Railways and Road Transport. Some instruction was also given in the Iron and Steel Industries. Instruction was also given in Military Targets and in the prevention of Demoli tions. Demolitions and P.T. were also included. Report GENERAL. A hardworking student who made very good progress with the technical subjects. He seems to have gained a sound grasp of our methods. MECHANICAL Showed great interest in these subjects SUBJECTS. and with a little more practice should become very good at recognition and attack. He understands our methods well. ELECTRICAL Made good progress and has a sound know- SUBJECTS. ledge of electrical equipment. He under stands the methods of attack. TRANSPORT Worked well during lectures and should have a good understanding of the subject. DEMOLITIONS. Good. P.T. Fair. SCHEMES. Showed himself to be quite a capable leader although he needs more practice in preparing orders. He has the right spirit and should do well. Date Signed Commandant., 147. t / l / r \ . V 4, 148. APPENDIX 11 g . Special Training School No Final Report on. ROIE. COURSE 10 days Intensive Demolitions. 1. DEMOLTIONS. He has received a thorough grounding and now has a very sound knowledge of the subject within the range of the Para-Military syllabus. On the practical side he is extremely metnodical he lacks speed but does a neat and careful job and takes no risks. He has complete confidence. 2. WEAPONS. He has fired .22 .32 Colt and Sten. He made slow progress at first but as the result of some intensive practice he improved to a remarkable extent and at the end was shooting con fidently and well. His chief faults are lack of speed and foot work. He has a very good knowledge of the weapons he has used. 3. PHYSICAL FITNESS. In view of his age and lack of strenuous ex ercise he was only given light work. He showed a steady improvement appears to be quite sound and should be able to stand up to a fair amount of strain His ropework is gcod. 4. MAP HEADING. He was given practical instruction and exer cise in the essentials. He showed an aptitude for it and now has a good working knowledge. 5. SILENT KILLING. He was given practical instruction in this and now has a good knowledge of it but he lacks aggression in practice. e. plans and orders. After Scheme 44/16 which suffered from his lack of experience see Report on Scheme he was given some instruction in this subject and now has some idea of it. INSTRUCTORS REPORT. In every way a very good student. He has worked conscientibusly and well and has not spared any pains to become thoroughly proficient. He is rather quiet and reticent by nature but has a very pleasant and sincere personality he has shown enthusiasm for his work and has a mature and re ceptive mind. I have every confidence in his abilities. .Lieut. Training Officer S.T.S.., COMMANDANTS REPORT.  We gave.plenty to do and he responded very well picking everything up quickly and thor oughly. He can certainly be relied on to do any job conscientiously and capably provided that he is able to remain in the background where his extremely shy and reserved manner would not be a handicap.  Major. Date Commandant S.T.S., APPENDIX 11 h .  SHOHT THREE DAY RECEPTION COMMITTEE COURSE. 1. STUDENT'S NAME. 2. SYMBOL. 3. DATES OF COURSE. 4. KNOWLEDGE OF RECEPTION COMMITTEE PROCEDUHE. 5. PERFORMANCE ON EXERCISES.  a Control of R.C.  b Action as Member.  c Use of Lights.  d Morse Letter Flashing. 6. DROPPING POINTS. Ability to select suitable points. 7. CONTAINER.  a Knowledge of Contents.  b Practical Handling. 8. COMMANDANT'S GENERAL REMARKS. DATE. SIGNED. O.C. S.T.S. 40, 151. S.T.S. 40. TEN DAY RECEPTION COMMITTED COURSE HEPOm. NAIffi. SYMBOL. COURSE NO. PROM.TO 1. S-PHONE.  a General  b Operating technique to a/c. He has operated the S-Phone to a/c.times by day and.times by night. Results  c Language qualifications  d Recommendations Signed. Instructor in S-Phone. 2. EUREKA.  a Gene ral  b Practical. He has worked Eureka to a/c on.occasions by day and.occasions by night. Results  c Recommendationsj- Signed. Instructor in Eureka. \, 152. 3. RECEPTION COMMITTEE WORK.  a G  b Practical Work - He has taken part in.R.C. Exercises and has had experience of the following rolls   1 White Lights. vl Eureka Operator  ii No. 1 Red Light. vii S-Phone Operator  iii No. 2 Red Light. viii Patrol.  iv No. 3 Red Light. ix Long-stop.  v Leader. x Look-out man. His handling of lights.is   c Ability as Organiser of R.C. Operation.  a Selection of dropping points.  b Orders.  c General Organising ability and control.  d Containers .  i Knowledge of contents  ii Container drill. Signed.  R.C. Instructor. 4. GENERAL report by c.o. Major Commandant S.T.S. No.  40., , APPENDIX 11 1 . FINAL CERTIFICATE. Training Name... Party No. & Rank Medical Category Age COURSE DATES. GRADING. REMARKS. 1 1. Students Assessment Board. 2. Para-Military Course  S.T.S. No. 3. Parachute Course.  S.T.S. No. 4. Finishing Course.  S.T.S. No. 5. Industrial Sab. Course 6. W/T Course. 7. Propaganda. 8. S-Phone. 9. Home-made Explosives  S.T.S. No. 10. Holding Training.  S.T.S. No. 11. Special Training.  S.T.S. No.J GENERAL REMARKS. Initials of Director of Training. Date. Initials of Regional Head. Date., , 156  APPENDIX II i . MINES AND FOREIGN WEAPONS COURSE GIDUP G11 f  STUDENT'S NAME.  SYMBuL...  COURSE  date of assembly .  A. OBJECTS. The objects of the Course are to teach students  a How to use captured enemy equipment against the enemy.  b To train others in the use of this equipment  c To select the correct ammunition for any weapon they may obtain.  d To neutralize enemy minefields and to lay British Mines. B. INSTHJCTOH'S REPORT. 1. German Small Arms.  a Knowledge of ability to recognise and handling of weapons.  b Recognition and selection of ammunition.  c General Remarks.  Signed . Captain.  2. Mines British and Enemy .  a Handling and use of British Mines state types taught .  b Recognition and knowledge of German Mines Igniters and Demolition Equipment.  c Degree of knowledge in Neutralization of Enemy Minefields state mines taught .  d General remarks.  Signed Captain., C. COMMANDANT'S HEPOTfl. \  Pinal Glassification.  A. Distinguished. Delete B. Good. which is C. Average ability. not D. Below average ability. applicable. \  Date Sigped Major. Commandant S.T.S.  /, 158. APPENDIX II k . Form T.H.S.l. HISTORY' SHEET. Party. S.T.S. No. School No.... Name by which known Nationality. Born at. Date of birth Profession. Family  Giving full particulars of circumstances location etc . Married or Single.. Children Languages  With order and degree of proficiency Hobbies I Areas intimately known Military History. Past History  Including Education Diplomas etc. in Chronolo gical order and Past Employment . %, 159. Measurements to be given in inches and weights in pounds.  Height. Weight.. Chest Normal . Waist. Seat. Expanded. Length of Back from Nape toWaist. Width of Back from Centre toj    i Shoulder. ii Elbow. iii Wrist Length of leg i Outside Waist toGround .  ii Inside. Size roundHead. Length ofFoot. Description including peculiarities etc.  i   Photograph., APPENDIX 111 a PHELIMINaKY school syllabus. This syllabus is not intended to be followed strictly but is a guide to Commp.ndants. 0830 0930 1045 1145 1400 1500 1630 1730 DAY to to to to to to to to NIGHT REMARKS 0915 1030 1145 1245 1500 1600 1730 1830 1. P.T. E.1&2 WT.5 WT.l TTI f75 ITT S.1&2 2. P.T. WT.7 WT.2 P.3 M.2 M.3 S.3 WT .3 3. P.T. D.l. D.2 D.3 WT.4 F.4 M.4 M.4 F.5 Signalling. Between periods 3.3 & 4. P.T. M. 5 M.5 Iff.6 F.6 F.7 D.4 D.5 3.4 students having learnt the 5. P.T. WT.8 WT .9 M.6 F.8 F.9 D.6 F.IO Morse Code should practise in 6. P.T. M.7 M.8 M.8 -F REE -their own time in order to per7. w. P.T. WrTIo D.10 dTt D.ll dTTTs. 4 1 73  fTTi WT.lI f.T2 WT. 18  713 ' /r.l3 f7T  feet their knowledge of the Code before further joint practice is 9. P.T. E.9 M.10 M.10 WT . 14 WT. 15 M.9. D.12 carried out. 10. P.T. D.13 D.13 WT.16 D.14 D.15 WT.17 S.5 WT .19 Period WT.19 may alternately be in11. P.T. F.15 F.16 WT.18 M.11 M.11 E.ll. 3.6 NIGHT eluded in a night scheme if circum  E.3 ATTACK stances permit. 12. P.T. E.4 M.13 M.13 D. 16 D. 16 M. 12 3.7 ON HOUSE 13. p.t. F7T7 m7T3 m.14 -FREE-PIT. is included as first period in 14. P.T. F.18 F.19 F.20 D.17 M.15 E.10 3.8 the morning but this should not be 15. P.T. D. 18 H. 16 M. 17 F.21 WT.20 3.9 E.5 NIGHT' considered a fixed rule -some SCHEME. types of students may prefer this 16. P.T. E.6 WT.21 S.1Q M. 18 M.18 M.18 3.11 at a different time of day. 17. P.T. D. 19 IT.22 F.22 F.23 D.20 M.19 3.12 F.26 & F.27. This final practice IS. P.T. WT.23 WT.24 S.13 F.24 F.25 3.14 E.7 NIGHT in Fieldcraft should include SCHEME. practice in the general principles 19. P.T. E.8 D.21 D.22 M.20 M.21 D.23 3.15 including the Surface Course. 20. P.T. 17 2 1723 sTTs- FREE 21. P.T. S. 16 S. 17 E.TS F.26 F .27 S7T9 ETTs, , 162  APPENDIX 111 a Cont'd . SYLLABUS OF WEAPON TRAINING. 3 Week Course. W.T. SUBJECT. HOURS PRACTICAL LECTURE. WT.l Rifle. Holding and aiming. 1 P WT.2 Bren. Holding and aiming. 1 P WT.3 Range Discipline Safety precautions 1 P IT.4 Miniature Range. Rifle. 1 P WT.5 Rifle. Care and cleaning mechanism. 1 P IT.6 Bren. Miniature Range. 1 P  JUT.7 Bren. Care and cleaning mechanism. 1 P WT.8 Sten Gun. Holding and aiming. 1 P WT.9 Sten. Practice 1 and care and cleaning. 1 P WT.10 Sten. Practices 2 and 3 and care and cleaning. 1 P WT.11 Pistols. Holding proving. Loading magazines. 1 P WT.12 Pistols. Practice 1 1 P WT.13 Pistols. Care and cleaning. 1 P WT.14 Pistols. Practice 2. 1 P TO. 15 Pistols. Care and cleaning. 1 P IT. 16 Grenades Cleaning priming and throwing dummies. 1 P WT.17 Pistols and Sten holding and aiming practices. 1 P WT.18 Grenades cleaning priming and throwing live grenades. 1 P WT.19 Pistols. Practice 3. Care and IT.20 cleaning. Rifle and Bren revision. 1 1 P P 'TO.21 Pistol and Sten revision. 1 P WT.22 Pistol and Sten revision. 1 P WT.23 Test -all weapons includes WT.24 Practice 4 Pistol and Sten . 2 P Total 24 HOURS., 163. APPENDIX III a Cont'd . SYLLABUS OF SIGNALLING. 3 week course. S. S.l S.2 S. 3 5.4 5.5 S .6 S.7 S.8 S.9 S.IO  5.11 5.12 S. 13 S.14 S. 15 S. 16 S. 17 SUBJECT Explanation of the impor tance of various methods of communication. Correct keying and a slow run through the Morse alphabet so that students grasp the sound and rhythm of the Morse Code. Teaching the Morse Code 5 letters at a time at a fair ly high speed with fairly long pauses between each letter. Each group of let ters taught will then be mixed with the preceding 5 letters. The long pauses between each letter should be gradually shortened. Practice sending. Attention to be paid to the rhythm of sending. Each group of let ters in dummy messages to be in blocks of 5 letters. Practice receiving. Attention to be paid to correct writing delay to be cut down by not withdrawing the pencil from the paper before the end of one word group but each group should be in block let ters and not running hand. Practice sending and recei ving. Each period of 1 hour to be devoted to hour of each. Signalling Test. Total. LECTURE- HOURS PRACTICAL -g-L - P 5P 2P 1P 5P 2 P 16 HOURS., APPENDIX Ill a Gont'd .  SYLLABUS OF PHYSICAL TRAINING. 3 week course.  One hour a day is allotted to P.T. and the time of parade should be arranged to fit in with  the day's programme. Instructors should bear in mind that a  strenuous Para-Military course follows and that  P.T. in addition to exercises should include games roadwork cross country work in snort  periods and competitions.  The closest attention snould be paid during this course to breaking in properly students' boots and to the hardening of the feet and road work in the concluding stages of the course  should be carried out in boots to this end. No progress beyond Table 4 in the Army Manual of Physical Training should be attemp  ted. Total hours 18.  Total periods 18. This total does not include games on half  holidays or voluntary games after working hours.  \, 165  M  M.l  M.2  M.3 M.4  M.5  M.6  M.7  M.8  M.9  M.10 i M.11  M.12 M.13 M.14 M.15  M. 16 M.17 M.18 M.19 M.20  M.21 M.22 / M.23  APPENDIX III a Cont'd .  \  SYLLABUS'OF MAP READING.  3 week course.  SUBJECT.  Maps. Their uses what to  look for on a map. Conventional Signs. Map references. Scales. Relief and contours slopes and gradients. Section drawing. Setting a map Comparison map and ground. Bearings use of protractor. Compass bearings conversion to and from grid bearings. Various uses of the compass back bearings resection. Methods of finding North. Map Reading Compass hunt Enlargement. Details checked and added on ground. Panorama sketching. Field sketching. Field sketching. Memorising following and describing a route. Route  reports.  Comparison British and foreign maps. Harder intervisibility. General revision. Map Reading test.  HOURS. LECTURE PRACTICAL.  1 L 1 L 1 L 2 L & P 2 L & P 1 P 1 P 2 P 1 L 2 L & P 2' P 1 L & P 2 P 2 P 1 P 1 L 1 P 3P  1P 1P 1P 2P  Total.30 HOURS.   \, 166  APPENDIX 111 a Gont'd . SYLLABUS OF FIELDCMFT. 3 week course. F. SUBJECT. HOURS PRACTICAL F.l Introduction. 1 F.2 Cover and Camouflage. 1 F.3 Crawling and Crossing Obstacles -Movement by day. 1 F.4 Reconnaissance of Ground selection of route. F.5 Movement by Night. F.6 Observation and reports - Use of Binoculars. F.7 Judging Distance. and 1 1 1 1 F.8 Individual stalk. Observation and Written Report. 1 F.9 Individual stalk. Observation and Written Report. 1 F.10 Recce of Targets House plans What to look for 1 F.ll F.12 Four hour scheme. 4 F.13 F.14 F.15 Preparations of individual plans F.16 for night attack on house to include sketch. 2 F.17 Individual Stalk use of ground and cover. 1 F.18 Short scheme to include written F.19 reports. 3 F.20 F.21 Observation and report to in clude panorama. 1 F.22 Individual selection of routes from a map not on ground 1 F.23 Individual selection of routes with a map F.22 routes selec ted here covered by students as an exercise . 1 F.24 Revision. Cover and camouflage F.25 reports orders panoramas etc. 2 F.26 General Revision as above. 2 F .27 Total 27 LECTURE. L L&P L&P L &P P L P P P L P P P P  P  P  P  P  P  HOURS, APPENDIX 111 a Cont'd . SYLLABUS OF DEMOLITIONS . 3 week course.  D. SUBJECT. D.l Service Explosives -Intro duction to Demolitions. D.2 Lighting safety fuse and simple electrical detona tion precautions to be taken and explanation. D.3 Pitting detonators to fuse and lighting fitting pri mers to detonators and light ing fuse. D.4 Main charges and facts about explosives. D.5 Making up dummy charges. D.6 Making up live charges and firing them. D.7 Explanation of Detonating fuse correct and incor rect method of constructing  ring main . D.8 Charges cutting and mined. D.9 Preparing and firing cutting charges. D.10 Calculation of charges. D.ll Preparing and firing mined charges.  D.12 Preparing dummy made up charges using rubberised fabric. These should be used and retained In night. schemes later in the course. D.13 T.E.W.T. selection of targets calculations types of charge etc.  D.14 Revision Calculation of charges. D.15 Individual demolition against time. D.16 Preparing and firing various charges using students' own made up charges. D.17 Demolition against time and simultaneous Dems. D.13 Practice firing simultaneous charges with ring main etc. D.19 Further practice. Made up charges. D.20 General revision. Cutting charges calculations etc. D.21 General test. Demolitions.  D.22 D.23 Result of test. Revision backward subjects. Total  PRACTICAL HOURS LECTURE.  1L  1L  1P  1L  1P  1 P 1P  1L  1P  1L  1P  1 P 2P  1P  1 P 2P  1P  1P  1P  1P  2P  1P 25 HOURS, 168 APPENDIX III a Cont'd . DETAIL OF MISCELLANEOUS SUBJECTS. 5 week course.   The index letter E. is employed to represent these subjects with the corresponding number attached . LECTUHE E. SUBJECT. HOURS. PRACTICAL. E.l Commandant's opening address  SECURITY . E E. 2 Explanation of Course issue of kit etc. - -x L E .3 Preparation for night exer cise. 1 Lor P E.4 Discussion on night exercise. 1 L E.5 Preparation for night scheme. 1 P E .6 Discussion on night scheme. 1 L E .7 Preparation for night scheme. 1 P E .8 Discussion on night scheme. 1 L E .9 Discussion on scheme. 1 L E .10 Discussion on scheme. 1 L E.ll Lecture on Security. 1 L E. 12 Results of tests. 1 L E. 13 Commandant's disposal. Pinal talk SECURITY 1 L Total 12 HOURS. SECURITY. There should be at least three Security lec tures delivered during the Preliminary Course. The vital part that security plays In the everyday existence of all those connected with us should be stressed and practical examples given if and where possible of bad security. P.A.D. There is no set time for training in this subject. All students however should be thorough ly conversant with the fitting and use of respira tors and accessories. Students should wear their respirators for at least two 15-minute periods each week and be taught how to decontaminate weapons., , 170  APPENDIX 111 b  STUDENTS ASSESSMENT BOARD.  LIST OF TESTS.  A P. TESTS.  1 Intelligence Tests.  a Ravens Progressive Matrices.  b Reasoning. Ccj Koh s Blocks.  dU Carls Hollow Square.  e Vigotsky.  2 Altitude Tests. S   I I a Morse Aptitude b Mechanical Aptitude c Observation.   3 P a Word Association b Murray s Thematic Apperception c Rorschach d Self Description.  Mutual Evaluation f Motivation.  B M.T.O. TESTS.   4 Group -Outdoor. fa G   b Group Task.  c Groupstacles. Indoor.  fd Group discussion.   e Planning Problem.  5 Individual -Outdoor. fa Follow my leader. fb Numbstacles. fc Probstacles.   d Leader Situations.  Indoor.  fe Emergency Situation.   f Approach Test fg Interrogation.  h Instruction Test. ] C MISCELLANEOUS.   6 fa Questionnaire.  b Security Test. NOTE. The full syllabus with precis of tests will be found in Handbook Appendix 1.,   i  . /  \ i / 'f A, 172  APPENDIX III c .  PARA-MILITARY SYLLABUS.  Subject. Total Number Total Number of boursT of night boure.  1. Demolitions 43 3/4 2 2. Map Reading 38 2 3. Weapon Training 32 4. Foreign Weapons 11-1 5. Silent Killing 12 6. Fieldcraft 14- 4 7. Appreciation Plan 4i ning and Operation Orders. 8. Minor Tactics 8 9. Schemes Day 3 12 Preparation 5 pJL   Discussion Data it  10. Schemes Night 4 8 8 Preparation 6 Discussion 3 Data 2 11. Assault Course 22 Physical Training Ropes etc. 12. Long Trek 8 13. Signalling 16 14. First Aid 2 15. Revision and Mutual 16 Instruction Para-Naval as re quired -2 days  268 16  NOTE. The full syllabus with precis of lectures will be found In'Handbook Appendix 2., , APPENDIX IllCd  PARACHUTE TRAINING  SUNDAY. MONDAY. 0815 hrs. 0830 hrs. 0900 hrs. 1000 hrs. 1030 hrs. to 1230 hrs. 1400 hrs. 1500 hrs. 1700 hrs. TUESDAY. 0845 hrs.  1000 hrs.  to 1230 hrs. 1430 hrs.  1600 hrs.  WEDNESDAY. 0900 hrs.  1030 hrs. 1045 hrs.  to 1230 hrs. 1430 hrs.  THURSDAY. 0900 hrs. 1000 hrs.  1400 hrs.  2200 hrs.  FRIDAY.  PROGRAJIDE.  Party arrives.  Issue of Kit.  C.O. s Address.  P.T. Demonstration of Course. Ground training.  Parachute Demonstration.  Air Experience.  Parachute Packing.  P.T. Ground Training.  1st. Descent. Slow Pairs.  700 ft. Corrective Discussion and Practice Sticks of 5.  2nd Descent. Sticks of 5. 600 ft. Corrective Discussion.  Leg Bag Training.  3rd. Descent. Leg Bag. Aircraft or Balloon.  P.T. Lecture on Container and Disposal followed by Practical Disposal. Lecture on Reception Committees. Night Descent. Party departs if programme is completed.  THIS PROGRAMME IS SUBJECT TO ALTERATION ON ACCOUNT OF WEATHER CONDITIONS.  NOTE. The full syllabus with precis of lectures wil] be found in Handbook Appendix 12., , 176  APPENDIX Ill e-  AGENTS FINISHING SYLLABUS.  Opening Address.  A.1 Introduction to Course. A.2 Individual Security. A.3 Informant Service. A.4 Cover A.5 A.6 Interrogations. A.7 Operational Orders. A.8 A.9 Know your Enemy. A.10 A.11 Surveillance. A.12 Internal Communications I. A.13 A. Revision A.14 Internal Communications II. A.15 Premises. A.15 W/X Security and Premises for W/T Operator. A.16 W/T Operator. A.17 External Communications. A. Revision. A.18 Organisation. A.19 Cell System. A.20 Security of Organisation. A. Revision. A.21 Recruiting. A.22 Discipline and Morale. A. Revision. A.23 Final Address. B.l Burglary. B.2 Lock-picking. B.3 Selection of Dropping Points and Reception Arrangements. To be given on instructions from London . B.4 Handcuffs. B.5 Pigeons. C.l/2 German Counter Espionage   a Civil -Security Police and S.D. \  b Military -Abwehr and G.F.P. C.3 German Uniformed Police. C.4 National Police -e.g. of France Belgium etcy  Given according to student's destination . C.5 The Nazi Party and its Formations in Occupied Territory. C.6/7 Recognition of German Troops by weapons and equipment.  C.8 Recognition of German Troops by uniforms. C.9 Military Intelligence Reports. C.10 Handling of German Light Weapons. C.ll Epidiascope -pictorial revision of German Weapons C.12 -do- German Police. and Armed Forces Uniforms., 177. D.l Morale Warfare. D.2/3 Methods of Morale Warfare. D.4/5 Subversion of enemy troops. D.6 Instructions for Foreign Workers in Germany. D.7 Passive Resistance in Occupied Countries. D.8 Current German Propaganda in Europe. D.9 Tasks Preparatory to Allied arrival. E. Introduction -Playfair or Multi-alphabet Innocent Letter Double Transposition Letter One-time Pad Mental Pad Mental. W.O.K. Systems 2 -4 or 5 Mental Indicator Iden tity Prefixes Security Checks Letter Open ing Secret Inks and Code 53.  Given according to individual requirements as notified by C/S etc. etc.  SYLLABUS OF EXERCISES.  X - Outdoor Exercises.  X.l  a Disposal of Parachute.  b Burying at night and contacting at a given rendez-vous. X.2 Attacking railway line  a Reconnaissance and planning.  b Attack by night. X.3 Burglary.  a Reconnaissance and planning. some person   b Orders and carrying out burglary. X.4 Subversive organisation exercise. X.5 Shadowing exercise in town . X.6 Shadowing and contacting exercise in town. X.7 Treasure hunt. X.8 Selection of dropping point.s. X.9 Fieldcraft. X.10 Reconnaissance schemes in town. X.ll Transport of incriminating material. X.12 Reception Committee.  a Recce.  b Night exercise-. X.13 Clandestine instruction.  a Recce.  b Night exercise. X.ll Military Lqtelligence Reconnaissance exercise. X.15 Cut-out exercise. X.16 W/T Operators exepclse. /, Y -Indoor Exercises  Y.l Descriptions and Identity Parade.  a Giving description.  t Identifying a man from a given descriptiom. Y.2 Observation Exercise. Y.3 Approaching and Recruiting. Y.4 Contacting Exercise. Y.5 Body Searches. Y.6 Simple Disguises. Y.7 Spare Y.8 Spare Y.9 Interrogation. Final Exercise. 96 hours scheme.  NOTE. The full syllabus with precis of lectures will be found in Handbook Appendix 4., , 180. APPENDIX III f . INDUSTRIAL SABOTAGE SYLLABUS. Lectures. Organisation of Industry 1 hour Factory Organisat ion. 2 hours Common Machinery. 5 hours Electrical Machinery. 3 hours Repair of Machinery. 1 hour Recognition of Machinery. 1 hour Lubrication. 1 hour Distribution of Electric Power. 3 hours Passive Resistance -General Principles. 1 hour Demolitions. 4 hours . Telecommunications. 3 hours Transport 2 hours Generation of Electric Power. 1 hour Power Station Plant. 3 hours Steam Power Station General 1 hour Railway Rolling Stock 2 hours Steel Structures. 1 hour Iron and Steel Industry. 1 hour Coke Oven Plant. 1 hour Blast Furnaces 1 hour Steel Furnaces and Rolling Mills 1 hour Incendiarism 1 hour Coal Mines. 2 hours Taneries 1 hour Railway Goods Handling. 1 hour Canals 1 hour Engineering Factories. 1 hour Machine Tools. 2 hours Oil Storage 1 hour Aircraft Factories. 1 hour Founderies and Forges. 2 hours Military Targets. 3 r hours . Prevention of Demolitions. 2 hours Weapon Training. 3 hours. P.T . 10 Periods. Exercises. Demolitions. Attack on Pumping Station. Attack on Railway Line. Attack on Railway Running Sheds. Attack on Lock Gates.  Visits. Electric Substation. Pumping Station. Power Station. Running Sheds. Iron and Steel Works. Small Engineering Factory. Aircraft Factory. Docks. Canal.  A number of revision periods were included and the course could be further modified to suit the needs of students of different nationalities or with special missions., 181. NOTE. The full syllabus with precis of lectures will be found in Handbook Appendix 11., 182. APPENDIX IlKp . PROPAGANDA SYLLABUS. 1. INTRODUCTORY. Basic Course three weeks at S.T.S. 39 including a week-end leave supplementary courses up to four weeks outside. The courses are arranged so that students may learn by doing rather than by listening. 2. BASIC COURSE. A. The Student's Definition of Propaganda with special reference to Operational Propaganda in his probable field of assignment and in rela tion to other subversive work. This exercise is corrected and discussed in de tail in a personal interview during which the student's approach to the subject his special aptitudes prejudices and fallacies are noted. The remaining exercises are preceded by brief explanatory lectures and followed by individual and joint discussions. B. Leaflet Exercises. The student is given spe cimen' situations calling for a particular line of action which he is to assist in provoking by means of printed material. His leaflet is to be considered as one element in a general propa ganda campaign. The leaflet is corrected and discussed in a per sonal interview in which emphasis is laid on the need of target analysis and thorough study of the community of which the target forms a part Revised versions of the leaflet are corrected in personal interviews during which the technique of propaganda presentation is further discussed. Except with selected personnel who will be specialising in preparing written propaganda this exercise is primarily used for training in problem analysis generally. It is not expected to reach a high standard in a very specialised kind of work but rather to show the students the inadequacy of shapeless thought and undis ciplined expression. C. Social Intelligence Exercise. The student is given certain basic facts and figures about a selected community comparable to that in which he will work. He has to plan out how he will  stratify' this community with a view to lear ning its vital interests problems and grievances and to state what methods he will employ for obtaining and interpreting information. This is subjected to discussion correction and re view . /D., D. News-paper Exercise. A specimen destine newspaper is prepared. The object of this issue is to prepare a specific section of an as-yetunorganised community for disciplined action against the enemy by presenting current news in the ways most likely to arouse the required eagerness-for action and at the same time to indicate the rea sons for concerted as distinct from irresponsible activity. The materials provided to the students for the pre paration of this newspaper are -for one selected week -all available pro-Axis newspapers published in the student's country of assignment full BBC Monitoring Reports covering all stations he would have access to and odd pieces of inside political news and gossip from that country. The exercise is designed to test the following capacities   a To follow and apply a directive.  b To select news with an eye to its propaganda value but subject to security considerations.  c To make world war-news have a local bearing.  d To lay out a readable newspaper. E. Oral Attack on Enemy Morale. Students 'meet' instructors representing the enemy and carry out a limited but carefully prepared attack on their morale during the course of 10 --15 minutes' con versation. This is followed by discussing the or ganisation of a mass campaign to be waged by their fellow-countrymen in contact with Germans in Germany or at home. P. Approach to Editor of existing Clandestine News paper. Students call on instructor representing editor and offer tactfully their services and fresh knowledge. This occurs towards the end of the course and tests what the student feels he can do. Time.'These exercises spread out over the course are calculated to take 10 days.  G. LECTURES AND DISCUSSIONS. The Nature of Social Intelligence.   a Breaking down the community to be studied.  b Application of sampling methods as well as ob servation informants etc.  c The continuous checking of results. How to run an Intelligence Service.   a The methods used in wartime Britain later studied under working conditions .  b Experience from the field.  c The interpretation of results. The Relation of Social Intelligence to Political Warfare illustrated by   a The use of printed material.  b The use of rumour.  c Personal infiltration and influence.  d Specially staged action. /Long, 184. Lonp -Ranp e Propaganda -BBC and. RAF Leaflets Enemy Propaganda.   a  b' General limitations of these methods.  c. The need to discover locally where and how long-range propaganda can best be supplemented General   d Themes and effects of enemy propaganda. The Enemy's Social and Economic Weaknesses.   a Economic  b Administrative.  c Morale. Time. It is calculated that 4 days of the course are occupied on the above subjects.  H. BACKGROUND  a Local Intelligence Reports provided by P.W.E.  b Talks and discussion led by P.W.E. Regional Experts.  c Detailed local Intelligence related to the student's proposed mission provided by P.W.E. and S.O.E. Country Sections.  d Study of Radio Propaganda to country of assignment.  e Study pf major issues of world politics Communism British Empire UKRRa etc. T ime.lt is calculated that 2 working days are occu pied by this .  I. PRINTING  a Instructions and practice in hand setting taking copies block-making etc.  b Instruction and practice in 'home-made' de vices in absence of normal equipment.  c Tour of large-scale printing works. PHOTOGRAPHY.   a Training in use of miniature cameras for copy ing documents etc.  b Training where specially required in 'com munications photography -both for courrier and pigeon services. Time. 3 days are normally allotted to Printing and Photography combined. Students who require addi tional practice or training are kept for extra time or released from some of the-more 'ideological' sub jects if their work is primarily mechanical and sub ordinate .  J. OUTSIDE S.T.S. 39 officers .  a BBC Short Combined Course 7 days giving an outline of wireless theory how to construct a simple transmitter and simple receiver studio lay-out microphone technique disc cutting. The normal student will learn how the system is worked rather than be competent to make it work himself.  / b, 185.  b BBC Combined Course 12 days . As above but fuller allowing students to learn effectively how to make and work simple transmitters and receivers and also how to build up a programme and get it on the air as in c below.  c BBC Course in Propaganda Broadcasts 6 days . Microphone technique disc-editing studio lay out policy planning administration talks creating and recording of a complete 15 minute programme along lines of BBC European broadcasts.  d With the Ministry of Information Home Intelli gence Division . 7 days. A problem in Opinion Testing is set in a selected area of Great Bri tain. The students have to make their own plan for conducting the investigation to construct questionnaires and to allot times to the dif ferent phases of their job. They are also if possible given practice in issuing instructions to an assistant this role being taken by the supervising officer and cross-checking this 'assistant's work and in devising a general propaganda campaign based on the report they write.   e Background Information with M.O.I . A 7-day course of lectures reading and visits to police-courts factories etc. can be arranged for students wanting to take to their country of assignment first-hand information about war time Britain. This should have immediate value especially in countering Goebbels' distortion and long-term value in fostering international understanding. If possible these 7 days should not be consecutive but fitted in to other courses to add variety and save travelling., 4  1944 June Mon. 19th. Tues . 20th. Wed. 21st.-  Thurs. 22nd. Fri. 23rd. Sat. 24th. APPENDIX III h . OPERATIONAL HOLDING SCHOOL TRAINING PROGHAlvllE. S.T.S. No. Date. 19th-24th June. 0900 0945 1045 1145 1400 1500 1700 1745 Night. 0945 1030 1130 1230 1500 1600 1745 1830 Lecture. Mutual 100 yds. P.T. Practical Practical Practical SABOTAGE PIAT & Range. MAP READING TREK. MESSAGES & CODES. HANDLING OF ROAD BAZOOKA. PIAT & WEAPONS. TRANSPORT. BAZOOKA. Mutual 100 yds. Revision. P.T. Mutual. 100 yds. Practical U.D. & .30 Range S.K. BREN. Range INNOCENT LETTERS. CARBINE. U.D. & BREN. .30  CARBINE. Mutual 20 yds. Mutual P.T. 100 yds . Prac Prac Prac WELROD & Range ATTACKING Range. SCALING PIGEON MESSAGES SILENT STEN. WEL-OIL & PETROL. RIFLE PRACTICE. HANDLING. & CODES.  ROD. .32. STEN. Lecture Lecture House P.T. iPx &ctsxc&l GERMAN. GERMAN Fighting SHADOWING PRACTICE GUILDFORD . LofC i LofC ii Course.22 Lecture Prac. Range P.T. Lecture 100 yds. Revision S-PHONE GUERILLA PREPARING THROWING 2 MORTAR Range. S-PHONE PRACTICE. WARFARE. GRENADES. GRENADES. 2 MORTAR Revision BATTLE Lecture P.T. MAP COURSE. 22 MOTOR CYCLE FREE READING. -MAINTENANCE.  STUDENTS. INSTRUCTORS.  186 Major Commandant S.T.S, APPENDIX 111 h Gont'd Date. 17th-22nd July. S.T.S. No 1944 0900 0945 1045 1145 1400 1500 1700 1745 Night. July 0945 1050 1150 1250 1500 1600 1745 1850 Mon. Visit to GUILDFORD POWER P.T. Prac. Pracs Lecture Prac 17th. STATION. PREPARING & THROW-CODING. TACTICS OF HANDLING ING GRENADES. PIAT. etc. WEAPONS. Tu'es. Visit to FELTHAM MARSHALLING Prac. MAKING UP AND Mutual. P.T. 18th. YARDS . FIRING CHARGES MISC . S-PHONE. Wed. Praci 100 yds. Prac. P.T. Prac. Revision. Recce and preparation SCHEME 19th. SIGNALLING. Range. NEUTRALISING. KEY S.K. for SCHEME 44/16 44/16  CUTTING. DEMO . Thurs Lecture. Battle Mutual. P.T. Prac. Prac. Prac. MESSAGE WRITING Prepn. for 20th. SABOTAGE Course. CLANDESTINE. HANDLING SCALING AND CODES. SCHEME. OF A/C . STEN . INSTRUCTION. WEAPONS. PRACTICE. 44/15 Eri. Mutual. 20 yds. Mutual. P.T. 21st. ATTACKING Range. ATTACKING -SCHEME 44/15 SECURITY -  WATERWAYS. .52 RAILWAYS. - Sat. ' Lecture 20 yds. P.T. 22nd. GUERILLA WARFARE. Range. -FREEt-  WELROD. STUDENTS. INSTRUCTORS. Major. Commandant S.T.S. No., APPENDIX III h Cont'd S.T.S. No. Date. 24th-29th July. 1944 0900 0945 T045 TUB 1400 1500 T700 1745 Night. July 0945 1050 1150 1250 1500 1600 1745 1850 Mon. Re vis ion. 20 yds. Mutual. P.T. Recce for Preparation for SCHEME 24th MAP Range. ATTACKING SCHEME NO.44/10 SCHEME NO. 44/10. No. 44/10. READING. WELROD WATERWAYS RECEPTION. Tues. Dis cuss. 100 yds. f.T. Recce & 25th. SCHEME. Range. -LIVING CONDITIONS IN. . Prepn. for No.44/10 STEM & U.D. Lectures by..Scheme TREK. Wed. S.T.S. No. 2 Range. 26 th. -Scheme TREK-PIAT MORTAR BAZOOKA. P.T. Thurs . P ra c . Ran ge . P ra c. Practical. Epidiascope 27th. PREPARING THROWING MESSAGES P.T. MAKING UP & FIRING Revision. GRENADES. GRENADES. & CODING MISC. CHARGES. INDUSTRIAL  SABOTAGE. Pri. Mutual. Range . Lecture . P.T. Prac. Revision Epidiascope. 28th. TREE TREE GERMAN ASSAULT FIRST AID. Revision. SPIGOT. SPIGOT. MILITARY COURSE. GERMAN WEAPONS AND  SIGNS. UNIFORMS. Sat. Lecture. Battle Prac. f1 .T. 29th. COUNTER Course. INNOCENT SCORCHING. STEN & U.D.LETTERS. FREE STUDENTS. INSTRUCTORS. Major. Commandant S.T.S, 189. I \ I I i  \i  I / V, 190  APPENDIX 111 1  S.T.S. 40. LONG 10 DAYS REGUPTIOM COMMITTEE COURSE CS-PHONE AND EUREKA . Based on more than 12 students for 10 days. The students will be divided Into 2 Groups Cl and 2  Day. Time. Group. Sunday 1900 hrs 1930 hrs 1st day 0900-0945 All Monday. 0950-1045 All 1050-1115 All 1130-1215 1 2 1215-1300 1 2 1400-1600 1 2 1700-1830 All 1945 All 2hd day 0900-1000 All Tuesday. 1000-1100 All 1130-1215 1 2 1215-1300 1 2 1400-1600 1 2 1700-1900 1 2 Night 2 Period.  Course assembles. Opening remarks by Commandant.  Lecture -Introduction to S-phone -Part 1. Lecture -Introduction to S-phone -Part 11. Lecture -S-phone - Aircraft co-operation procedure. Physical and recrea tional training. Ground exercise 1 S- phone. Ground exercise 1 S- phone. Physical and recrea tional training. Air exercise 1 S- phone. Lecture -Essential theory of S-phone. Lecture -Reception Committee procedure. Film.  Lecture -S-phone in spection. Lecture -S-phone operational procedure. Physical and recrea tional training. Ground exercise 2 S- phone. Ground exercise 2 S-phone. Physical and recrea tional training. Lecture -Essential theory of S-phone. Air exercise 1 -Sphone. Air exercise 2 -Sphone. Morse training with torches. Instinc tive pointing of torches. Air exercise -Sphone., Day. Time. Group Period.  Srd day Wednesday  4th day Thursday  5th day Friday  0900-1000 1000-1030 1100-1300  1400-1600  1700-1900  Night  0900-1000  1000-1100  1100-1300 1100-1200 1200-1230 1230-1300 1400-1500 1500-1530 1530-1600 1400-1600 1700-1900  0900-1000 1000-1100  1100-1300  1400-1500  All  All  1  2  1  2 1  2  1  All  All  1  2  2  2  1  1  1  2  1  2  All All  1  2 All  Lecture -S-phone sit ing. Preparation for Sandtable exercise. Lecture -Battery charging 1 -mainten ance. Air exercise 2 -Sphone. Air exercise 3 -Sphone. Lecture -Battery charging 1 -Mainte nance. Morse training with torches. Instinc tive pointing of torches. Air exercise 3 -Sphone.  Air exercise -Sphone.  Lecture -Battery charging 2 -Battery belts. Lecture and demonstra tion -S-phone in air craft. Air exercise 4 S-phone. Syndicate study on Sand-table. Physical and recrea tional training. Revision and questions S- phone Syndicate study on Sandtable Physical and recreation al training. Revision and questions S- phone. Air exercise 4 -Sphone. Air exercise 5 -S phone. Lecture -Battery charging 3. Practical battery charging.  Lecture -Containers and their disposal. Lecture by Major TICB Dispatching Agents containers and packages Lecture -Battery char ging 3. Practical    battery charging. Air exercise 5 S- phone. Lecture by Capt. YELLARD - Contents of Standard Containers and packages., 192  Dax   5th day Friday  contM  6th day Saturday  7th day Sunday.  8th day Monday.  Time.  1500-1600 1700-1730 1730-1900  1945  0900-1000 1030-1300 1400-1600 0900-1015  1015-1100 1130-1215  1215-1300  1400-1500 1515-1615 1700-1800  1800-1900  1945 2130 Night.  0900-1015  1015-1100 1130-1215  1215-1300 1400-1600  1700-1745  Group. All All All All  All All All All  All All  All All  All All All All  1. All  All All All  All All  Period.  Visit to Demonstra tion Room. Practical Examina tion -S-phone. Written Examination -S-phone. Practical -Break ing dowi of Con tainers.  Lecture -Selection of dropping points. Reconnaissance of dropping points. Sand Table Exercise.  Lecture -Stores delivery and Navi gation of a/c. Eureka-Rebecca Film. Lecture -Introduc tion to Eurekas. Description of Eurekas Mks. IB and  11. Grouhd Exercise - Eurekas Mks. IB and 11. Lecture -Operational procedure. Lecture -Operational data. Lecture -Description of Eurekas Mks. Ill 111AM 111B. Ground Exercise -   Eurekas Mks 111 111AM and 111B. Briefing for Reception Committee Exercise. Orders from leader for  R.C. exercise. R.C. Exercise with Aircraft.  Group 2 will attend as spectators. Lecture -Siting of  Eureka and functions of Fixed Beacons. Practical with Rebecca. Morse Code. Ground Exercise - Eurekas Mks 11 111AM 111B. Lecture -Eureka Security. Exercise with Aircraft -Eurekas Mks 11 111AM. Morse practice. Eureka-Rebecca Film., 193  Da . Time.  8th day 1745-1900 Monday  contM 1945  2030 9th day 0900-1030 Tuesday 1100-1130  1130-1300  . 1400-1500  1500-1530 1530-1600 1700  2130 Night.  10th day 0900-1015 Wednesday.  1030-1130 1130-1230 1230-1300  1400-1500  Wednesday P.M. or Thursday A.M.  Group All All  All All  All  All  All All All All  All  2. All  All All All  All  Period.  Ground Exercise - All Eurekas. Discussion on Recep tion Committee Exercise. Film.  Lecture -Eureka Batteries and Maintenance. Lecture -Charging batteries without use of main supply. Practical demonstra tion of charging apparatus. Revision and ques tions -Eureka-Rebecca. Discussion on S-phone examination. Discussion on opera tional orders. Briefing for Recep tion Committee Exer cise. Orders from leader for R.C. Exercise.  R.C. Exercisemth aircraft.  Group 1 will attend as spectators. Eureka-Rebecca Exam ination and conclu ding talk. Lecture by Station Navigation Officer. Reception Committee Examination. Discussion on Recep tion Committee  Exercise. Closing Talk.  Course disperses.  Aircraft Requirements. 1. S-phone. 1st day -Monday 2nd day -Tuesday 3rd day -Wednesday 1400 - 1400 - 1700 - Night. 1100 - 1400 1700 - Night. 1600 hrs. 1600 hrs. 1900 hrs. 1300 hrs. 1600 hrs. 1900 hrs., 194  S-phone cont d  4th day -Thursday 1100 -1300 hrs. 1400 -1600 hrs. 1700 -1900 hrs.  5th day -Friday 1100 -1300 hrs.  Total -24 hrs.  2. Eureka -Rebecca. 8th day -Monday 1400 -1600 hrs. 3. Reception Committee Exercises. 7th day -Sunday Night.  9th day -Tuesday Night.  NOTE. The full syllabus with precis of lec tures will be found in Handbook Appendix 9., , 196  A ir P SK l\i D 1X III .jj  JADBURQH TRAINING 61LLABU6.  Training 1'ails into tnree main sections  A. Preliminary -a weeks. Demolitions.pa Hours. Sabotage Technique...p5 n Group BTraining.au 11 Propaganda. .pu M tenemy Forces. . U n Reception Committee Training....lu Minor Tactics and Planning......lu M MapReading.B 11 SilentKilling. 8 lieaponTraining..15 w DaySchemes. a8 PhysicalTraining. 1 T each   JayjL  Total..pSS hours.  B. Parachute Training at S.T.C. 1'inishing Training course This course completes the training of Jedburghs so that they can fill any one of the following roles   aj urganise and lead raiding parties varying in size from 5 to lu men up to a maximum of luu.  bj urganise'the reception of stores and equipment for the personnel they recruit.  cj urganise acts of sabotage by small bodies of men working independently.  d Secure and pass on information about enemy troop  movements location of vital points etc.  ej spreading of rumour and fifth column work.  ij preparing the civilian population for the arrival  of Allied forces., , S.O.E. STAFF-COU1SE. Introductory. 1 P.T. and Unarmed Combat. 21 Demolitions. 27 Weapon Training. 16 Motor Cycling. 1 Map Reading Message Writing and Recce Reports.19 Fieldcraft and Minor Tactics. 13 Schemes including Reception Committee. 19 Staff Duties. Lectures. 5 -do-Demonstrations. 3 -do-Scheme. 5 S.O.E. Communications. 2 Codes and Cyphers in Formations. 1 Air Section Lectures. 7 Para-naval Operations. 1 Interrogation of Agents and Prisoners. 1 Rapid Examination of Documents. 1 Intelligence In the Field. 1 Escapology. 1 First Aid. 1 Personal Administration in the Field. 1 March Discipline. 1 Container Disposal. 1 Street Fighting. 1 Revision. 2 Spare. 4 156 Weapon Training.  a Pistol. 1. Holding proving and loading. 2. Practice I. 3. Practice II. 4. Practice III.  b Sub Machine Gun. 1. Holding loading and aiming. 2. Practice I. 3. Practice II and III.  c Bren. 1. Mechanism. Holding and aiming. 2. Range practice.  d Rifle. 1. Holding and aiming. Care and cleaning. 2. Range practice.  e Grenade . 1. Cleaning mechanism. Throwing dummies. 2. Throwing live grenades. Schemes. 1. Ambush. 2. Attack on Enemy H.Q. by night. 3. Ambush by night. 4. Attack on a bridge by night. 5. Prevention of enemy demolitions. 6. Reception Committee work. All schemes will be preceded by reconnaissance recce report appreciation plan preparation and issue of orders. Each scheme will be followed by detailed com ment and discussion., 199. Fleldcraft and Minor Tactics. 1. Introduction. 2. Cover and Camouflage. 3. Movement by day. 4. Movement by night. 5. Individual stalk. 6. Judging distance. 7. Minor tactics. 8. Raiding parties. 9. Demonstration Raid. 10. Practice of Raid Formations. 11. Ambushes. r 12. Attack on house. 13. Street Fighting. Map Reading Message Writing and Report Writing. 1. Conventional signs and map references. 2. Relief and contours. Slopes and gradients. 3. Scales. 4. Finding north setting the map. 5. Bearings conversion protractor compass. 6. Back bearings. 7. Intervisibility 8. Memorising following and describing routes. Route reports. 9. Practical route reports. 10. Sketch maps. 11. -do12. -do13. -do14. Comparison of British and Foreign maps. 15. Message Writing. 16. Reconnaissance Reports. Demolitions. 1. Introduction. Service Explosives. 2. Main Charges. 3. Fuses Primers and Detonators. 4. Detonating Fuse. Constructing Ring main. 5. Making up Dummy Charges. 6. Making up and Firing Live Charges. 7. Cutting and Mines Charges. 8. Preparation and Firing Cutting Charges. 9. Calculating Charges. 10. Firing Main Charges. 11. Delayed action charges. 12. Underwate.r charges. 13. Operational charges. 14. Trap Mechanisms. 15. Setting traps. 16. Incendiaries. 17. General Destruction. 18. T.E.W.T. Selection of targets suitable for S.Q.E and schemes of attack. 19. -do20. -do21. -do22. -do- I Staff Duties. 1. General principles. 2. Man power and establishments. 3. The Division and its staff. 4. The Corps the Army and their staffs., 200. 5. Duties and Manner of 'Working of S.O.E. Staff Officers at Army H.Q. 6. Demonstration -Work of S.Q.E. Staffs. 7. Personal Administration in the Field. 8. Scheme -Work of S.O.E. Staff with Formations. Air Section.  1. Organisation of Section and Relationship with Air Ministry. 2. Selection of Dropping Points and Acceptance by Air Ministry. 3. Procedure at S.O.E. H.Q . on receiving demand for stores. 4. Procedure at Stn. 61 when dealing with demands for stores. 5. The work of the Conference Room. 6. The work of the despatcher and method of drop ping. Naval Section.  1. Para-Naval Operations. Signals.  1.  Characteristics ding ciphers. 2. -do --do3. Codes and Cyphers used by formations in the Field., , Hi H 202. APPENDIX III l .  SYLLABUS FOR FOREIGN WEAPONS COURSE -STS 47. German Ammunition. Recognition Penetration Interchangeability. 2-J German Rifles. G.88 K.88 G.98 G.98A K.98K. G.33/40 G.41 W Location Characteristics. Stripping Handling. 1- -   German Pistols. Steyrs. 05 08 12 Mauser 9 mm & 7.65 mm. P.08 37 38 F.N.22 Walther P.P. Walther P.P.K. Location. Characteristics. Stripping. Handling. 1  German S.M.Gs. M.P. 18/1 28/11 M.P. 34 0 Bergman. Long and short. Erma M.P. 38 40 40A. Location. Characteristics. Stripping. Handling. ih  German M.Gs.  M.G.s. 13 15 81. -Stripping Location Characteristics Handling. M.G.s 34 & 34/S -Stripping Location Characteristics Handling. 2M. G.42 -Stripping Location. Characteristics Handling. lb M.G. 08/15 -Stripping Location Characteristics Handling. lir German A/Tk. Rifles. Pz. B.39. 20 mm. Solothurn -Stripping Location Characteristics Handling.  Mortars. 8l mm. 50mm -Stripping Location Characteristics Handling. ii  Hand Grenades and Pistol Grenades. i  Smoke Weapons and Rifle Grenades. 1  Pyrotechnics lecture and demonstration 2  Total hours of instruction. 21 Range. 4 Revision. 10 Test. 1  36, APPEND IX III l  [Cont'd .  SYLLABUS FOR THE GERMAN MINES BOOBY TRAPS AND GERMAN DEMOLITION COURSE -STS 47.  SUBJECT. HOURS. Theory Practical German Igniters. Tellermine 35. Tellermine 35 S 42 & 43. Neutralizing Equipment. Lay & Lift Tellermines. Questions & Answers. Riegel Mine 42 and Tilt Igniters. 'S' Mine & E.S.M.I.Z. 40.' T.29 Improvised Mines. Lay & Lift Riegel & 'S' Mines. S.D.2 P.L.A.T. & C.V.P. British Mk. II IV & V. Hawkins M. Mine and British Shrapnel Mine. Clearing Traps by rope. Hawkins road block. Methods of English and German Mine  Laying. German Demolition Equipment. Revision Bottle Glass & Pot Mines -Chemical  Igniters. Gap and Gap marking. Practical Breaching. Minefields and Minefield Recce. Stocks. Visit Museum. Common Booby Traps & Marking Simple Electric Methods Methods of entry to suspected proper  ties. Clearing & occupying suspected house. Revision and questions. Examination.  Totals.  21 3/4. 13j  l, -204  APPEMDIX 111 1 .  Cont 'TIT \ SYLLABUS FOR SNIPER COURSE -S.T.S. 47.  SUBJECT. HOURS.  -   Practical. Theory. No. 4. Rifle Mechanism Care and  iI i   H Q2     i1 i   Cleaning. Shooting & Zeroing Iron Sights. Shooting & Zeroing Iron Sights. 2 Application 100x Hun Heads. 1 Use of Telescope. Elevation Table 32 T/S & Zeroing. 32 T/S & Zeroing. 2 Other T/S & Zeroing. Cleaning Rifles. 1 Aiming off wind & movement. Application 4' Target 200x & 300x 2 Snap Shooting 200x 2  Application 400X 1 Crack & Thump Lecture and Demonstra tion  At South- Location of Street Snipers. 1 ampton Loop Holes and Hides. 1   Locating and Engaging moving targets. 2  Penetration & Discussion. 1  i1 i    Loop holes hides field of fire.  H 02 i[ HjOi ii HH 0J  Zeroing T/S Revision. 1   1   Judging Distance. a Observation & Reports. Observation Schemes 1 2 & 3. 2  i   Camouflage Suit and Climbing Irons. a Fieldcraft Movement. Field Firing. 5  Total hours of instruction. 25  Opening talk and issue of kit. Oral Examination.  Total 38 hours., , 206  APPENDIX IV. NUMBER OP STUDENTS TRAINED IN S.T.S. 1. Number of students trained at all S.T.S.s.  includes O' students and S.A.S . 6810 2. Number of students trained at all S.T.S.s. by Nationalities - British 480. American.  760. French. 639. German Directorate. 50. Free French. 662. Siamese 21. Czechs. 351. Norwegians. 654. Russians. 37. Yugoslavs. 13. Poles. 945. Dutch. 239. Spanish. 135. Italians. 24. Irish. 5. Danes. 150. Hungarians. 55. Germans. 169. Belgians. 377. 1C' Students. 872. S.A.S. 172 6810 3. Number of students trained at a Group A.  b Group B.  c S.T.S. 17.  d S.T.S. 51. Actual students 5220. Army personnel 520.  C students 872. S.A.S. 172. Jedburghs. 420. 2479 1802 1201 7204  e  f S.T.S. 40 S.T.S. 39 705 4. Total number of students R.T.U. 1532  From September 1941 to July 1944. 3 week Basic Courses -579. Special Courses. -299. Average number of students on Basic Courses September 1941 to December 1942 -10. January to December 1943. -18. January to July 1944. -28., I  207. APPENDIX V.  CLASSIFICATION OF STUDENTS.  In order to assist in the classification of all stu dents according to their capabilities it has been deci ded to draw up a system of grading as given below. In reports submitted every endeavour should be made to classify each individual member of a party according to this grading. It is realised that earlier classi fications may be faulty owing to there'being insuffi cient time to grasp the capabilities and'characters of the people concerned. Subsequent reports there fore should grade each man independently of previous reports.  'A' First class organiser capable of taking charge of a large area and of influencing important people or existing movements. This does not necessarily imply that he should be a member of the 'Ruling Classes' he may be ina position to influence Trade Unions Communistic Circles etc. If so these should be specified.  'B' Second class organiser who is not-of the same grade as 'A' but can take charge of a local area and influence any particular class or occupation therein.  'C Man capable of acting as Staff Officer to 'A'  'D' Man capable of acting as Staff Officer to 'B'  'D.l'. Suitable for leader of a diversive band.  'E'. Man possessing special technical knowledge of any particular industry trade etc. who can influ ence executives or operatives.  'F' Man possessing special technical knowledge of industry trade wohks but not having influence of 'EHe can howeVer advise as to method of creat ing the greatest am ount of damage by striking at vital supplies or introducing methods of passive resistance .   F.l' Suitable for Instructor in tactics and tech nique of diversive operations.  'G' Courier.  'll' W/T Operator.  ' ' Ordinary member of raiding parties.  'J' Lone worker thug ready for anything but un disciplined and non co-operative., A  Administration Agents Selection of  see also under Students  Assessment Board . A Group Air Liaison Section. American personnel. Anderson Lt.Col. P.G. Anderson Manor. Appreciations and Operation Orders. Arisaig House. Audley End. Australian training.  B. Balden Lt.Col. A.D. Bancroft Lt.Col. J.H.P. Basic Course see under Sabotage  Industrial and Propaganda . Bellasis B Group.  B Group Conferences at Blackbridge. Blackden Major W.L. Boarmans Bonzo Training. Booby traps neutralisation of Boykins. Brickondonbury. Briggens. Brock Hall. Brooker Lt.Col. R.M. Brown Lt.Col. G.A. Buckland Brigadier G.C.B. Burgess Mr. Bush Major J.  C. Cammusdarach. Canadian Training see under S.T.S. 103 . Carrier pigeons training in hand ling of CD. Cell bookle-ts. Central Landing Establishment  R.A.E. PAGES  7 10 11. 14 17 80.  3 4 23 51 61. 54. 12 77. 25. 51 62. 27. 3 23. 4 49 72. 76. 25. 2. 15. 4 13 33 46 55  65. 60. 33. 42. 33. 31 54 55. 61. 59 41. 4 72. - 15. 35 75. 19. 3 6 10 11. 2 23. 23  40 56 64 34 53 61 65. 74. 9 30, C Cont'd  Centre 20 C Group.  Charge standard. Charley Lt.Col L.W. OBE. Chicheley Hall. Clarke Major. Clobb Gorse. Code Training. Cooler. Conference Commandants. Conference week-end. G Organisation see under S.I.S. Counter Sabotage Training. Counter Scorch Training. Country Sections liaison with. Coup de main operations method of  mounting. Coup de main operations training for Czech Section.  D. Danish section. Davies Col. F.T. Dehn Major P.E. Demolition equipment enemy. Demolition training. Direction Generale de Etudes et  Reserches. Director of Training position of. Discipline. Driving of mo-tor vehicles training  in. Drokes the Drumentoul Lodge. D Section. Dunham House  E. Edwards Major C.J.  Enemy Organisation training in. Prisoners of War training of  see under Bonzo training . Equipment supplies of.  Eureka. Evans Lt.Col. I. Eqcercises -Paramilitary  -Finishing -Propaganda -Group 0 Operational -'Spartan'  PAGER  78. 16 50 59 61 62. 27 43 82. 18. 49 73. 41. 33. 35 37. 15 18. 16. 60. 44. 44. . 9. 54. 44 53. 6 72.  50. 2 3 10. 75. 61 . 26. 77. 6 74 79. 8. 55. 33. 73. 2 46. 30. 30. 35. 82. 57. 25. 28. 36 37 59. 48. 52. 59., 210  P. Pawley Court. Fieldcraft'. Fighting French Section. Finishing Training.   see also under Group B . Finishing Training duration of.. Folliss- Major P. Foreign Workers use of in Germany. Forthampton House. Forty Major G.M. Fulshaw Hall  PAGES.  49 16 27. 15. 4 33 67 75 36. 35. 39. 49. 12. 30. Gallie Major W.B. Garramor House German Directorate GlaschoilLe Glasnacardoch Lodge Glenmore Lodge Godfrey Major A.W. Gorse Hill Grayson Lt.Col. T.H. Green Major D.E.F. Grendon Hall Group A see under A .  B see under B . C see under C . Gubbins Major General C. Mc.V.  CMG DSO MC. Guerilla warfare training. Gumley Hall  H. Hackett Major J.W. Harford House Hatherop Castle Helford River. Hill -Brigadier G.A. DSO QBE MC. Hilton Major D.P. Holding Training see also under  Operational Holding Training -. Holding Training Country Section  control of. Home-made Explosives training. House-on-the-Shore the. House-in-the-Wood the. Howbury Hall Howe Lt.Col. A.G.  46 47. 23. 54. 23. 23 24 61. 73. 3 23 61. 49. 25 50 61. 45' 70. 3 4 6 10 18. 53 60 82. 49. 46 47. 33. 49. 71. 2 33. 11 12. 4 49 66. 4 71 79. 41 56 65. 33 33. 31 57. 10 11., Inchmery House. 15 Indian Training Schools. 76.. Industrial Demolition Handbook. 43. Information sources of. 9 Ingham-Clarke Lt.Col. F TD. 25. Inspector of schools. 16 Instructions training. 8 Instructors training of. 60 -qualifications of. 15   selection of. 67. Intelligence Section. 9 Inverie House 3 Jedburgh selection. 21 -training. 21 Josephine operation. 53.  ILi.  Kaplovitch Major A.L. 70 Kempton Park. 54  Leg beg. 31 Loch Ailort. 3j Lock-picking 40 London Group. 54 Lysander-Hudson Training see under  Pick-up training  M. Map reading. 16 Maquis 53 Massingham Mission training schools. 76 Meetings training. 10 Meoble Lodge ' 3  M.E. 65. 13 61 M.E. 102. 76 Micro-photography see under photography Milton Hall see under M.E. 65 . Mines 61  M.I.R. 2 M.I.5. 18 59 Mockler-Ferryman Brigadier E. QBE MC ' CB. V Munn Col. J.W. 3  PAGES..  36. 50. 74. 61 69. 34 41 67. 54. 23. 55. 31 55 59. 35. 44 56 64. 27. 93.  42 53 59 66. 66 68.  3 23 25. 37 44 47 65 78.  34 54 55. 4 6 11 23  25 33 34 61. Musgrave Lt.Col. 60, 212  PAGES.  Naval training 24 28 71. Norwegian Section. 24 29 73.  0. Office of Strategic Services. 12 75 77. Office of War Information. 75. Officers S.O.E. training of.   see under Staff Courses SOE . Operational Holding Training. 24 38 39  49 62 65 68. Opinion research training in. 48. Orca yacht see under Naval Training -. Organisation of the Training Section. 11 79. Overlqrd operation 59. Overseas training 13 74 81.  Para-military training. 18 23 32 39  see also under Group A 52 60 66 67  75. Para-military training -duration of. 25. Para-naval training see under Naval Training . Parachute Training. 30 67 39 55 Patterson Prof. E.J. 2 33 46. Parachute Training School No. 1.  R.A.F. 30. Periwig Bonzo Training see under Bonzo Training Peters Commander P.T. R.N. . 2. Philby Mr. H.A.R. . 2 33 35 46. Photography 40 47 62. Physical Training. 16 26. Pick-up training. 71. Polish Minorities Section. 72. Polish Section. B 71. Political Warfare Division of  S.H.A.E.P. 47. Political Warfare Executive 35 46 47 77. Post-graduate training. 38. Preliminary training. -duration of 3 17. 14 32. -amalgamation with Holding schools. 51. Pre-parachute training. 32. Pre-selection. 21. Printing training in. 48. Propaganda training. 35 46 62 68 75. -length of. 47. Properties. 7. Psychiatrist 12 19., Q. PAGES. Quins. 4.  R. Raid tactics. 27. Reception Training. 31 39 57  66 68. -duration of 57. -availability of air  craft for. 58. Research Section. 9 54. Rest of the World Directorate. 13. Rheam Lt.Col. G.T. 41. Rhubana Lodge. 3 23 24. Rings the 33. Riser yacht see under Naval Training . Roper-Caldbeck Lt.Col. A.T. 75. Rothschild Lt.Col. Lord. 44. Roughwood Park 49.  S. Sabotage Industrial training. 41 66 77.  see also under S.T.S. 17 . Sabotage Military targets. 43.  -Railway. 39. Saltma-rsh. 33. Safe-breaking training.-44 65. Scheme 96-hour. 37.  -Country section opinion of 38. Sconces. 4. Scullion operation. 54. Security section. 15 18.  training. 35 36.  Segregation of students. 15 19 24 30 33 42 47 80.  Selection Board No. 205. 21 59. Shetland Base. 71. Silent Killing. 16 Signalling. 16. Signals Directorate of 70.   -Section 70 -Training see under wireless training . Sinclair Lt.Dol. A. 19 21 59. S.I.S. 30 77. Skilbeck Lt.Col. C. 35 75. Special Air Service Troops. 77. Special Allied Airborne Rescue Force. 78. Special Training Centre Loch Ailort 3 35. Special Training Schools - Headquarters. 6. Selection of officers for. 69. Overseas 74 76., S Cont d PAGES.  Special Training Schools Cont'd - Nos. 1-6. see also under Pre    liminary training . T5. No.2. 54. 7 see under Students Assessment Board . ' 17. 2 3 4 29 35 39 41 46 55  65. 19. 55.  f 21-25. see under Group A .  26 73.  31-37 see under Group B .  r 39. 47 63.  40. 31 57. 41-50. see also under Opera tional Holding Train ing . 49.   43. see also under Polish . 4G.  Section .  47. 51 62. 11 51 see under Parachute Train  ing  52. 70.  63. 72.  103-. 75.  S-phone 57. Spooner Col. P.V. 12 16 50 60  74. Staff courses S.O.E. 60 66. Station XVII.  2.  XVIII. 65.  XIX. ' 55. Stodham Park. 15 21 61 63. Stores. 7. S.T.P. see under Propaganda Training . Street Fighting. 55. Students Assessment Board. 16 18 51 59 80. -Leave 17 24. - Movements .of. 7 . -Rejection of. 18. -Segregation of. see under Segregation  s Sykes Major E.A. 12. Syllabus preparation of 8 9. Swordlands 23 24.  T. Tarbet base.  Technical training.  Tempsford Aerodrome.  Thame park.  Traigh House.  Training - see under individual subjects sabotage parachute etc.  Transport.  24 29.  70. 71. 49. 23. 7. I, 2 15  U. Un-armed combat.  User-Triala.  V. Vineyards.  W. Waddicor Major T.B.  Wall Hall  Wanborough Manor.  Warnham Court.  Warren House.  Water Eaton Manor  Water jumping.   /eapon training.  Weapons foreign supply of training.  Wedgwood Major J.  Welfare  Wilson Col. J.S. QBE.  Winterfold Wireless Training.  Woolrych Lt.Col. S.H.C. QBE.  X. Y. Young Colonel J.T. MC DCM TD.  I \  Z. 16  9. 33  46 47 15 72 33 49 31 16 82 61 35  8. 3 73 15  66 12  12  PAGES.  26.  70.  63. 63. 24 26.  66 68.  6 10 11  19. 24 28 36 70. 18 33 35. 25 79., , PORETfOHD imiODUCTIOH 1 TEE PROBLEM TRAINING HAS TO M S . 1 ' TECHNICAL TRAINING  a Courses. 3   b Visits. Or  Sxercis . 7   d Instructors. 8 LQUIFK3IT. 10 LISTS OP TECHNICAL T3HSS3. 11 MIXING OF STODarrS OF DIFFERENT NATIONALITIES. 11 LOCATION OF SCHOOIS. 12 DEMOLITION TRAINING. 12 DEMOLITION ST0R5S. 14  SECSJRTTY. 15 RELATIONS WITH TECHNICAL SBCTIONS. 16 RELATIONS WITH CODNTBT SECTIONS. 19 AIR-BORNi TROOPS. 19 --- Os-'  k-P.miG iS A and B, ,  .Vfr  1   a iSpoRT oa tha  DSVSLORia OF' mPOSTRIAL SABOTAGE TRAIHIHG . at S.T.3. 17  Aumst 1941 -August 19iA  mpRCDUgnoii. 1. This Report reviews the development of Industrial Sabotage Training at S.T.S.17 it refers to some of the difficulties that have been experienced and ii akes recorsosadations with a view to avoiding theta on a future occasion  2. Organised sabotage was not developed in the last War and no previous experience was available on which instruction could be based. It was necessary therefore to start from scratch and first develop suitable saethods of sabotage and then to devise a suitable training prograimae. J. At this time it appeared to be the generally accepted view that Industrial Sabotage was simply a profitable sideline to the activities of secret arey personnel but it early became apparent that this was a wrong point of view and that properly planned and carried out sabotage might well be decisive and cause the early defeat of a country by removing its ability to produce weapons. This can be illustrated by the fact that by attacking the ower Stations of this country. Industry could be paralysed for a very long period with less than two tons of explosive. THE PROBLEM TRAINING HAS TO Umt  4. The object of Industrial Sabotage is to stop i-v . is is as i Aeselltlen problem a an gent, , yacsacAL mmro  7. It is oOiisi&ered that the linaa on which the training was developed are satisfactory and the results obtained by   the Basic Course were on the whole surprisingly good. Each  course was divided into groups of not more than 12 students  and each group was instructed separately.   a Coursesg Three types of Courses were provided   1 Basic Course This was designed for non-technical personnel and lasted three weeks. It reviewed the organisation of Industry and dealt with the sabotage active and passive of concon machinery electric power transport telecoiinunications and ' iforics and Factories of different sorts fhen required it included shipping and canals. The syllabus was varied in accordance with the nationality of the student and it included about ten visits to Works of one kind or another. A typical programe for a French and Belgian party is attached as appendix B.  In the autumn of 1943 ranch of the instruction on passive methods of sabotage was out out and instruction of targets of a military nature was introduced   il Specialist Courses  These courses were begun at the request of Country Sections for Agents who were going to specialise in one particular branch of Industry or who were going out on a special mission. They usually lasted from one to seven days.   ill Operational Coursesg  These were designed for coup de isain and  Combined Operations parties and were concerned only with the party s immediate objective. They usually lasted from two to seven days.  8. It will be appreciated that to cover such a wide rang of subjects in the Basic Corn's -a range of subjects  that normally takes engineers years to learn -presented a  problem of peculiar difficulty. Satirfactory results were  however obtained   Ey reducing the instruction to fundamental principles which in turn ware based on   ii The time it takes to repair or replace a machine., V  -4    iii % concentrating on recognition features rather than on bow and why a machine 'works  iv Standardisation and  v The elimination of unnecessary alternatives.  On paper on the sabotage of aeroplanes issued by the Organization contained no fewer than twenty-three methods of attack. Ho Student can remember such a list which only confuses him . 9. One serious fault was the short time allowed the Basic Course and on a future occasion to make the training thorough it should be increased to five weeks duration the last being devoted to additional practical work and schemes. It is fait that this extension of time is essential. s Thoroughly trained men will always produce better resultstm a larger numbar of sesd-trained and as in the Field an Agent trained in this Country has considerable influence and is looked upon as an expert it is important that he does not miderrair. confidence in the Organisation by making a raistage.  10. The Basic Course entails a very intensive effort on the part of the Student. On a course longer than three weeks leave will be necessary and it is recommended that week-end leave is granted each Saturday from 16.00 hours.  see also Section 39 11. With non-technical personnel. Specialist Courses are not satisfactory unless the igent has first passed through the Basic Course. They give him an incomplete training without ary proper foundation and fit him not altogether adequately on3y for his one particular mission. x  Most Iruy technical courses last three months or more although the student is specially selected on account of his mechanical aptitude., It Is strongly raaoirmended that evessy Agent should pass through the Basle Course and that the Specialist Courses sisoaid be regarded as refresher courses in a particular subject or as an extension to the Basic Course if the Agent is concerned with an Industry not included in that Course Under no circumstances should they be regarded as a jaeara of reducing the period of training to be undergone by the geat  12 Operational Courses present no difficulties. The instruction hould include a visit to a -Terks of the ssuae tgrpe and siae as the Target This gives the Party greatly increased confidence and enables them to appreciate any special recognition feature and the siae of the mchinezy a subject non-technical personnel axe very liable to under estimate Practice attacks on this same plant should be arranged whatever the security difficulties  13 It was found that it was much easier to teach active methods of sabotage that is methods involving the use of explosives than passive. Passive methods in general require more technical knowledge and any but the most simple are not suitable for non-technical personnel unless their training can be extended over a longer period  14 The programme was so arranged that one Basic Course of three weeks duration occurred every four weeks5 this gave a free weak between Courses and enabled Operational and Specialist Courses to be concentrated in this period. Owing to the shortage of instructional staff it proved in convenient to have Basic and Specialist Courses running  concurrently., -6    b Yisits 15e Visits to Works and Factories and similar installations form an invaluable aid to training which ary amount of lecturing cannot replace. As many as possible should be included in a Gourse. It was found most satisfactory to ooisajence with simple visits such as Pumping Stations where a variety of common machinery can be seen and to finish with the larger fiinginearing Factories. Plants of the latter typ tend to overwhelm the student and should be left until he has become raore machine minded. T-is confbrms to the natural sequence of instruction and is no disadvantage. 16. Although it is best to take the student to installations of the type he is likely to find in Ms area in the Field this is not essential. His need at tMs time is to obtain as mch practice in the recognition of machinery as possible and aiy plant containing a representative selection of ccnaon machinery will make a good visit since such machinery is found In all types of industry. 17. The Basic Course visits were regular features of the training programme. The necessary arrangement were made with a Director of the Firm and the same Instructor was sent on each occasion. In this way very happy relations were soon established with the Ftaas and in some cases the Barty was allowed to go round the Works without a guide. This is the best arrangement as the Instructor can talk more freely. Except in the case of Bocks and similar installations a party visiting a Works should not exceed 12 in number and where possible there should be two Instructors one for each six students. If this is not done it is quite impossible  fer the majority of students to understand what is going on., , -8   as an addition to th night scheirjes in syllabus of training.  22. As a general xule the students should be divided up into parties of not more than four-for both the night schemes -nd the daylight exerciEes this ensures that every man has a real job to do and it is more representative of actual conditions in the Field than if the whole group of twelve does the exercise at the same time. It means that the exercise has to be repeated three times in the one night but the benefits obtained are worth while.  23. Pumping Stations Power Stations and Loconotive Sheds night only are typical of good targets for these exercises. It is not recommended that factories should be attacked as it is difficult to obtain representative conditions and the practical and security problems involved are considerable. 24. Sabotage Students should be taught towncraft in addition to fielderaft and how to move about buildings which are occupied. There was not time to include this in the training at S.T.S.l but it is important. 25 On no account should either a night scheme or  dayli it exercise be allowed to become a teat of the Firm s Security Organization. If this is permitted and the  exercise is successful someone will get a rap from the Management or the Security Officer. This will Interfere with the good relations that must be built up not only with  the Management but with the junior officials and workpeople  as well.   d . Instructors  26. Until recently the whole of th technical instruction at S.T.S.17 was carried out by nyself and three assistant instructors. Concurrently suitable methods of sabotage, -9  had to be worked out usd a training systea davisadj in addition hendbooka and deaaalitian reports had to be prepared.  This has proved too mch and aliasst from the beginning the School haa been understaffed. Any future establishment must allow for a larger staff.  Tha fault was due partly to failure at the beginning to visualise the problem on broad enough lin s but ultimately to the Impossibility of obtaining suitable personnel either from Amy or Civilian sources.  One result of this has been that the original key Instructors have had no change of employment or chance of advancement and have seen mesiaers of the Technical and other branches of the Organization promoted more rapidly. This has been a source of genuine grievance as they are experienced engineers and have proved themselves first class instructors. Future War Establishments should take into consideration the need for the promotion of Instructors.  Some raen too are certain to find instructing irksome after a time and to desire more active employment. But their experience is needed by the Organization and posts in other Sections should be open to all Instructors Their technical qualifications experience and knowledge of the student particularly fit them for posts as Technical Advisers to Amy J.H.Q s and Missions Abroad.  27. The teaching of such a large technical subject as Industrial Sabotage to mn-technical personnel in a period of a few weeks is a difficult problem and special attention should be given to the selection of the Instructors., , -11   3. A. gpod quality camera for photographing dacolitions. 4. A 16 mm. Cine Project with sound together with suitable films showing Industrial processes. 5. Simplified coloured diagrams of Industrial processes and machines. 6. Models of up-to-date common machinery and continental locomotives. The machine models should preferably be sectioned. 7. Telephone line equipment. 8. Sam les ofcommon machines. These should be of medium size preferably of Continental make. They may be second-hand but should not be obsolete. They should be properly installed and when possible provision should be made for running them light . A list of the machines which it will be desirable to have is given in Appendix A 9. Samples of Eneny equipment -Aeroplanes Guns Tanks etc. also of Continental railway wagons. 10. Regular supplies of machinery and steelwork for demolition purposes and of flat bottomed rail track. 11. Lifting Tackle etc. of capacities up to 10 tons together with all necessary accessory equipment. 12. A small workshop including lathe drill and screwing machine. LISTS OP TECHNICAL TERMS  29. Although every endeavour was made to reduce to a minimum technical terms the use of many was unavoidable. It is very desirable that Students should have such terms correctly translated into their own language. This was not found possible at S.T.S.l as there was no Interpreter available with trie necessary technical knowledge.  Such lists should be prepared on another occasion and preferably separate lists should be made for each group of lectures i.e. one list for Common achinery another for  Electrical Machinery andther for Transport and so on.  MIXING-Or STOPaKTS Or DIFfiRSITT HATKMAI.X'iTfclt  30. S.T.S.17 was one of the few Schools at which, 12  Students of different nationalities were instructed together. Although sometimes presenting small difficulties in training for example on one occasion it was necessaiy to have three different Interpreters translating at the same time for one group of twelve Students on the whole it proved an unqualified success. It gave Students an opportunity of getting to know men of other nationalities and helped in a small way to promote good feelings between nations. British students were treated in exactly the same way as Allied.  LOCATION OF SCHOOLSs  31. Schools for Industrial Sabotage should be located  within easy reach of an Industrial area preferably an area containing Basic Industries and large Docks but in the open country to avoid undesirable attention and provide facilities for demolition training. It is an advantage if they can be near Headquarters and the other Technical Stations. Hertford has met these conditions remarkably well and only two of the regular visits were outside a 30 mile radius. This is important as travelling time on visits must be cut Sown to a minimum to avoid waste of instructional time.  DEMOLITION TRADTINg 32 Demolition Trainingm it was first introduced into the Organization centred around the explosive and what it could be made to do. Instructors in their enthusiasms tended to multiply the ways in which the same things could be done and devised all sorts of interesting but hardly practical experiments.  This is the wrong approach to the problem. The training must have in mind the ultimate Target -Industry that is. Machinery. It must be suited to not Sappers, -13  or ths Agent trained in this Country but the Operator in the Field who in the majority of cases will have received only a few hours' instruction under unfavourable conditions and who has probably never witnessed a practical demonstration.  Unless these points are constantly home in mind training may easily develop on the wrong lines particularly    in the preliminary Schools where make-believe targets have to be used The training should bes    1 As simple as possible -if there is wore than one method of doing a thing only one that which is most foolproof in the dark should be taught  2 Standardised throughout all the schools of the Organization.  3 Based on the use of standard made-up charges and xvhat they will do against the different materials used in the construction of machines. Nothing should be taught about explosives as such all that is needed is that the Agent should know what a standard charge will do how it should be initiated and how it can be connected up with other charges. /iny further information is unnecessary will be confused when it is passed on to others and will lead to errors but the manipulation of the charge leads and initiators must be practised until it becomes a habit which will never be forgotten.  33. A simplified and. standardised system of training was introduced in all the Schools in this country last Summer and as a result the standard reached by the Students in Demolitions has greatly improved. 34 It is recommended that all demolition Instructors should pass ttrrough the Basic Sabotage Course before commencing their instructional duties. In this way, -31 .  they cm gain a good general picture of the Target the  Student is 'being trainad to attack and it enables them  better to appreciate the problems involved This has  been the practice since cd.fl 1943  paOLI'nOHSTORESi .  35. The standard mde-up chai'ge l -lb and 31 lb is the largest single factor contributing to successful demolitions in the Field. It is desired to place this on record as there was considerable opposition to its introduction shich was delayed many months in consequence. It has bean pointed out earlier in this report that what is suitable for the scientist or the trained Sapper may be quite unsuitable for the Operator in the Field and it is from his point of view that these problems must be regarded Experience has shown that the ordinary Operator cannot make up charges correctly every time and that he develops unsound ideas on what is required unless shapes and sizes are laid down. Of equal importance is the lack of time and opportunity to carry out such woxk in safety if large quantities of explosives are involved 36. The other stores in use at present are generally satisfactory but for record purposes it may be worthwhile to list improvements or additional items that will be of immediate benefits 1. Standard Ig-lb. and 3 lb. charges with provision for self-contained time delay and initiating device. The less the Operator has to do the more chance is there that the demolition will be successful . The charge must remain felxible. 2. An Adhesive to enable standard charges to be fixed in position without the use of magnets adhesive tape or string etc 3. A Time Pencil more accurate and less dependent on temperature.,  4  -15 -   Ln 4nti-removal Pase lir-armed smaller in size than the present store and therefore of more universal application.  A Detonator which cannot he inserted into a Time Pencil or Fog Signal etc. the wrong way round.  A genex al purpose Incendiary suitable for igniting transformer and heavier oils.  All stores Oordtex Adhesive Tape Time Pencils etc. should be finished matt dark grey or other suitable colour  A method of sabotaging a railway wagon axle-box so that it will run hot after not less than 100 miles but before the mileage reaches 300  9. A simple but certain method for causing train derailments. 37 Xt is further recommended that no new stores should be put into production until they have been tried out by Students in the Training Schools under operational conditions. A device which may be perfectly satisfactory when used by Scientists and export personnel may prove a complete failure when used by the comparatively untrained Operator.  33. It is also recommended that the Training Section should be consulted before it is decided what stores should be sent to the Field and in what proportions they should be included in the containers. Collectively the Schools have more experience of what is required than any other Brandi of the Organization. sactmrm 39. It is considered that it will be in the best interests of security if students are restricted to the  School compound during the week and given leave each  weekend see section 10 . This leave should be spent  not less than 10 miles away from the School., 17  capabilities of the Operators and the conditions  likely to arise in fee Field This resulted in  inconsistent often unsound or unsuitable advice being  given to the Agents and unsatisfactory stores being sent into  the Field. in this connection 1 desire to record that  when the branch of LH Section cliiefly concerned beearne  assare of the methods taught at S.T.S.17 they co-operated  fully .  42. To avoid correspondin'-difficulties on a future occasion it is suggested that the Technical Sections  should be organised on the lines shown in the Table opposite  and as explained below and that the personnel should have  the qualifications stated -   Technical Director -In charge of all Technical Branches to be a jiian with wide experience of Industry with at least some years of practical experience with machinery.  Grout One -Corresponding to the present L Section. This should comprise two sections the first to co-ordinate and advise on Targets the second to be responsible for collecting all necessary technical intelligence and for the preparation of information required by other technical branches. They should 'QZ issue Sabotage Handbooks  The personnel of the first section should have a wide experience of Industry but need not be practical engineers the staff of the second should be engineers with some practical experience  Group Two -Corresponding to the present S.T.S.17 but including the 'ischnical Advisers to iruy G.H.Q Missions Abroad etc..  The Commandant should be in charge  1 of all instruction ana responsible ibr the carrying out of demolition trials on machinery also for the preparation of all handbooks pamphlets etc. on  sabotage methods., -16 -  RI5LATICH5 'I SBGtIONS 4D This matter is important because unless the technical advice and the instruction given to the Country Section and the igent is the best and is consistent and suited to the Operators that have to be employed satisfactory results cannot be expected. In the end it is the instruction given to the Agent which will determine whether what is accomplished by the Organisation is decisive or merely of nuisance value.  41 Quite important difficulties have occurred during the past three years between S.T.S.l and the other technical  sections in this-connection.  At the time S.T.S.l was transformed into an Industrial Sabotage School the position as far as it affected the school was roughly as followsi    L Section -collected technical intelligence  advised on methods of sabotage and issued to Country Sections and Missions Abroad instructional handbooks and pamphlets. Station IX  Laboratory Advised on charges and methods of sabotage also issued Contributions on sabotage methods. Station XII Manufactured charges either in accordance with instructions from Station IX or in accordance with what they considered was best for the operation in question. The personnel of these sections were in general net recruited from the engineering Industry and consequently they had hod no recent practical experience of machinery and were not aware of the modern possibilities of repair and replacement . In mary cases they were not familiar with machines of the type for which they were issuing sabotage instructions. They were further handicapped by having no contact with the students and on that account were unaware of the, U TECHNICAL BISECTOR GROUP OFE GROUP TOO GROUP THREE SOUP FOUR Target Technical COiiiisandant Technical Supply Section Researcii. Advisers. Intelligence Sabotage Advisers to Sei' sols. Arngr G.H.Q. and lissions Abroad. Operational Long Squire.i.nts Tiiie Paclting. Camouflage, This will ensure that the instruction  is kept to up-to-date and is verified by actual teat and that the advice  given to Missions Abroad and Courtosy  Sections agrees with the instruction  given to the Student  Technical infonation and intelligence  that ha my req ire should be supplied  by the Intelligence Branch of Croup  One.  The Schools should be under the Director  of Training for administration and all  matters other than these relating to  the technical side.  The Technical Advisers should be drawn  from the Instructors in the Schools  or when this is aot possible should  have been through the Basic Course  This will ensure that the best advise  is given to .toy Q.fv.Q'a and the  Missions Abroad. It will prevent  instructing becoming a dead-end  occupation end will give Instructors  a chance of projaation.  T i . qualifications of the personnel  in the whole oi this Group should be as  laid down on page 10 for Instructors.  This group should be generally siiuilar  to the present Supply Section but  should have a closer liaison with the Training Schools It should include  the Packing and Camouflage Sections ag  -base three sections should work in the  closest co-operation. The key  personnel should have had experience  in this branch of work in civil life or in the E .1 0 0...  Should comprise a small Research Section divided nto two branches  the first if necessary in conjunction with research laboratories of civilian  firms should be concerned with the  improvement of existing devices or the  production of new devices required by  the Operational and Training Groups. The  second section should deal with long  term research in the development of new devices and new methods chemical of sabotage.  The group should be staffed oy scientists preferably with Industrial experience., -19  The roupi- g of all the technic 1 sections under one Director should do much to eli rdnate inter -departm3ntal friction and to ensure that all branches work together as a team to produce the best possible Sabotage Organisation. siatioks mn comrtRT sections 42. Close relations with Country Sections ai-e of mutual benefit. Periodical -visita with Country Section Heads and their Senior Officers should be encouraged. In this way they will kee in touch witix tlie latest training methods and the Schools with the problems of the Section. Liaison of this kind keeps the Instructors au fait with what is going on and helps to maintain their interest in the Organisation as a whole. It is reeOEsaeaded that at least the junior Officers in Country Sections should pass through the Basic Sabotage Course before taking up their duties in their office. In this way they will know something of ti capabilities of their Agents and the target which they have to attack. It is a help to the School to h&ye some knowledge of the tudent s ultimate mission and informal interviews with those Agents who have returned from the Field and have dealt with sabotage matters are of great value. Experience has shown that over a tankard of beer r oaiy more details of interest can be extracted from an Agent than can be obtained at the more formal interview n London AIR-BOMB TROOPS t 44. Although properly outside the scope of this report attention is drawn to the fact that airborne and other troops used against Industrial Targets should, -20   foe givan taolmical trai'nlng on the lines developed by tills organisation. . 4v ZMkn BoSC A.eO G' Xe LI .COL. R.S.M.K. Gmi mWT S.T.S.17. o, APP 'iTBXX A '.THS of  coaOT mom liiiiliam Sizes  lew Pressure Centrifugal Pfensp 12 to 1 auction. High Pressuie Centrifugal Puep 6 to 8 stage 6 suction.  Single Stag Blower Roots Blower eccentric ans Sealed Blowar Vertical 'frlple 'A ansion Steam Engines 100 H.P. Horizontal Oompoend Steam Engine 100 H.P. 6 cyl Diesel-Generator Set D.G. 75 Kw.  1.3h or T.oar P -ensure Horizontal Reciprocating Pump 200 g.p.E 2 Stage Vertical Co.. ressor. 400 au.ft/min Horizontal Reciprocating Compressor -do - Rotary Convertor 250 Set. Motor Generator Set AC/bC 400 Kw. 5 Hi. Trarjafortaer 500 K.V.A. Electric Minch 60 H.P. Electric 'fetors AC d DC 5 H.P. Some of the above iypea of maohines may become obsolete during the nest 10 or 20 years.]