[M-   ARCHIVES HS's/  SECREf  FILE NUMBER SUBJECT AMERICA-S.O.E./O.S.S Policy & Liaison  9 0.E. \s b.   VOLUME    S.O.E. -Donovan Treaty FROM TO  RS 7 91214, iNDEX'HD  GFT/2510. 10th July 1942.  I write to confirm our conversation of yesterday on the subject of the agreement recently come to between us and Colonel Donovan for collaboration between British and Merican S.O. organisations.  My understanding is that there were only two points which you would like to see amended in the agreement contained in the Record of our Discussions with Colonel Donovan's staff officers namely   i BURMA. You wished Burma to be described as a British sphere of influence into which the American S.O. would be free to work from China instead of as in the exsiting Record a no-man's land into which both the British organisation in India and the American organisation in China were free to work.  ii You wished it to be explicitly laid down in the Principles that in the allocation of territories as either exclusively or predominantly British or American the factor of Military Commands in the area in question should be the principal consideration and that the allocation of territories on this basis should be reviewed from time to time in the light of the development of the military situation. Thus for example if British forces were some day to operate in China in circumstances which might amount to this area coming under British Military Command we should have the right to claim that the present allocation by which China is to be treated as an American sphere of influence should be reviewed in our favour. It was further agreed that the procedure to be adopted in regard to any modification of the existing Record of Discussions with Colonel Donovan s staff should be as follows  As soon as we had obtained the comments of both the Foreign Office and the Chiefs of Staff on the Record we should advise our American colleagues of all the changes which were desired by our people. Colonel Donovan would presumably do the same after he had received the comments of the Chiefs of Staff and the State Department. At that stage the question would arise of drawing up an amended agreement to be accepted and signed by both parties. This opportunity would be taken to draft an agreement in a simpler and more condensed form that the existing Record.  P.T.O, In the meantime we undertook to prepare for you a simplified and consolidated statement of the conclusions embodied in the Record of Discussions and this will be sent to you as soon as possible. f P.N. Loxley Esq. Foreign Office London S.W.l. S l i, Registry No. FOREIGN OFFICE S.W.I. July 1942.  P.N.L. Vv  Draft. Many thanks for your letter GFT/2510 of the 10th July about the agreement between yourselves and Colonel Donovan for collaboration  from fromfrom ' --  'anS.O. Mr. Mr.Mr. Loxley. Loxley.Loxley. which you men tion in the second paragraph of your letter were Che only two cnanges in the agreement suggested at the last Foreign Office -S.O.E. Meeting. At the same time as Sporborg and I explained a good many other ideas and sugges tions were ventilated on both sides. Most of tb s discussion was however either incon clusive or of a preliminary nature due partly no doubt to the fact that it was not entirely easy to study a series of documents in which some of the later papers amended or superseded points agreed in the earlier papers. It was therefore suggested at the end of the meeting that a single document should be prepared for further consideration and that in the drafting of it regard should be had -scythe various views ex pressed during this preliminary discussion. When this new single document is ready it will obviously have to be considered here in detail and then discussed Y/ith you at one of our meetings and I should think it is quite likely that further amendments may then be suggested.  1/, INDEXED  14th. July 1942.  Eany thanks for your letter GFT/2510 of the 10th July about the agreement between yourselves and Colonel Donovan for collaboration between the British and American 3 0. organisations.  The two points which you mention in the second paragraph of your letter were I think the only two specific changes in the agreement suggested at the last Foreign Office -3.0.S. Meeting. At the same time as Sporborg and I explained to you a good many other ideas and suggestions were ventilated on both sides. Host of the discussion was however either inconclusive or of a preliminary nature due partly no doubt to the fact that it was not entirely easy to study a series of documents in which some of the later papers amended or superseded points agreed in the earlier papers. It was  therefore suggested at the end of the meeting that a    single document should be prepared for further consideration and that in the drafting of it regard should be had to the various views expressed during this preliminary discussion. When this new single document is ready it will obviously have to be considered here in detail and then discussed with you at one of our meetings and I should think it is quite likely that further amendments may then be suggested.  I do not suppose there is any misunderstanding between us on this but I think that I ought to make it clear that the points which I mentioned to you at our talk are by no means necessarily final.  BtiAOUliiiHttil, I imagine that it would probably be useful to discuss at a Foreign Office -3.0.E. meetin0 the future procedure to be adopted as between yourselves and Colonel Donovan but for what it is worth I agree with you that the procedure which you suggest in the third paragraph of your letter is probably the simplest and best.   Sd. p. m LOXLEY, INDEXED  GFT/23  28th July 1942.  Dear  t I attach hereto copies Nos. 1 2 and 3 \ of a summary in the form of an agreement of the  record of discussions between British S.O.E. and  1 \ -vvOSa -V American S.O. which took place during Colonel Donovan s visit to London.  L-Pt\ c v As you will see I have provided for the insertion of paragraphs to meet the two tr . Vt points raised by the Foreign Office in the  ' course of our conversations.  I have not included in this Summary Records Nos. 4 5 and 6 which of course you have already but which are not concerned with matters of interest to the Foreign Office.  As a matter of interest I might mention that we have received a telegram from New York advising us that the agreement attached as an addendum to Agreement No.5 has not been approved by the American authorities and that they have counter proposals to make.  Yours  Peter Loxley Esq. Foreign Office S vv.1., COPY 'CIPHER TELEGRAM DESPATCHED TO HEW YORK.. 1.9.42. FOLLOWING FOR LOUIS FRANCK From Colonel Taylor. 1 Further to our 2973 vie have now received telegram from Lord Glenconner QUOTE Telegram received from Cairo No.0795/0796 of 31.8.42. UNQUOTE 2. We fully appreciate your desire not to make protest to Colonel Donovan on basis of London agreement unless absolutely necessary but we feel situation regarding American organisation in the Middle East is now reaching really dangerous phase and must be cleared up. Therefore think you should approach Colonel Donovan to secure definite application of London agreement regarding Middle East or if you consider this inadvisable for tactical reasons at least to ensure that no action contrary to London agreement or compromising our ultimate control in this area should be taken. 3. We greatly fear that unless a definite ruling is agreed with Colonel Donovan and issued by him to his people both in Washington and in Cairo we will shortly wake up to find that American'S.O.E. representatives in Middle East have actually established relations with Allied or other elements in Middle East which it will then be impossible to eliminate and which /ill cause unending confusion. 4. We also fully appreciate the points made in your 06926 arising from fact that London agreement has not formally beoi ratified by either side. For action suggested in paras 2 & 3 above we think you can rely upon moral obligation on Colonel Donovan to act in accordance with agreement pending formal ratification. At the same time we have taken up urgently with Foreign Office need for immediate authority to ratify without any, amendment at all and we are reasonably confident we shall get this authority within next 48 hours. We shall also get formal letter from Chiefs of Staff suitable for exchange by you with Colonel Donovan., COPY  CIPHER TELEGRAM DESPATCHED IQ MET YORK- 25. 8. 42.  2918 2920 and 2921.  Following for Col. Franck from Mr. Keswick  K Generally very little progress has been made in carrying out provisions of agreement chiefly because Colonel Donovan's organisation apparently remains in embryo condition both at Headquarters and in the Field.  B. Colonel Donovan's representatives here have never discussed with us again this agreement and we still await Colonel Donovan's confirmation and ratification which he promised after submission to A and State Department. C. lie have submitted agreement to our own Chiefs of Staff and to Foreign Office. Former have given blessing which is rather vague but which definitely authorises us to go ahead with execution of the agreement. Foreign Office have so far suggested only two very minor amendments. Firstly description of Burma as British sphere into which O.S.S. free to work from China instead of as No-Man's land. Secondly more explicit provision that allocation of spheres open to review in light of development of military situation. Foreign Office advise us they have some further minor suggestions to make but we can safely assume no material change will be proposed. D. 1. S.0.para-military activities in B. have almost been reduced to nothing more due to C opposition than to policy of handing over to Colonel Donovan. 2. Our other S .0. activities are almost wholly confined to R.I.I. and until Colonel Donovan decides on his set up in B. presumably after B's report it is surely unwise to contemplate still further reduction as at present there is virtually ho Colonel Donovan organisation in B. with which to liaise. 3. Whatever organisation Colonel Donovan is eventually able to set up in B. we do not contemplate withdrawing our secret support of the C secret organisation centred in R.I.I. in which E is also interested but on S.O. para-military side we will submit to lead of Colonel Donovan and will set up liaison specially in regard to stores and co-operation with our P. T.C, 2  Mission in F. from where it has been agreed Colonel Donovan should not operate.  4. Lt.Col. John Keswick can fully explain situation. E. Position regardind Cape Yerde is still as indicated in our telegram We fully recognise that we have no right under agreement to establish representative at Cape Yerde except as Liaison Mission with American Mission. We would however like you to put it to Colonel Donovan that the Foreign Office are appointing vice Consul to Cape Yerde and have given us the chance of nominating a man. Ks it would clearly be in interest of both organisations that British Yice Consul in Cape Yerde should be S .0. . minded we would like his permission to go ahead with scheme. When his own Mission is established in Cape Yerde Vice Consul could carry out liaison duties provided for in agreement. Please telegrapl Colon l Donovan's reaction as soon as possible.  F. Since Colonel Donovan has not yet so far as we know got Missions in any other Atlantic islands we are not making any plans for appointing further liaison missions in this area at present. G. We are obtaining necessary information from Cairo and will telegraph again as quickly as possible. SEE MY IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING TELEGRAM.   ..oOo,   COPY  CIPHER TELEGRAM DESPATCHED TO HEW YORK 25. 8. 42.  Hr. 2922.  SEE MY IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING TELEGRAM.  A. is U. . Chiefs of Staff B. is China. C. is Chinese. D. is Hayden E. isM.ofI. P. is India. .. .0O0, CIPHER TELSGR-Ali FROM CAIRO- 25. 8. 42  Hr. 0701 Following from Lord Glenconner.  A. It may of course be that there is some secret understanding between Captain Robert Low and 'Washington. My impression is that Capt. Robert Low believes in trying to get on by getting things done. Hence though he is on his own admission in reality only liaison officer attached to this mission he is initiating plans of his own on strength of information he learns from us and other sources and his contact with General Brereton. He then telegraphs Washington for necessary equipment and personnel. B. Trouble is that though he appears quite willing to cooperate with us he professes to be ignorant of terns of our agreement with American S.0. and states he has had no instructions regarding it. C. He sees no reason therefore why he should not get busy in Greece and Turkey as well. In this regard he tells me he has two assistants one of whom he is now proposing to send to Turkey to investigate and the other to Cyprus. D. I am prepared to regard this as harmless for the present for unless he is playing doublegame or breaks faith with me he will not do anything without my knowledge and consent. E. It is clear that this state of affairs cannot be allowed to continue and that his principals must either appoint him as head of American Mission advising him of terms of our agreement and instruct him to negotiate with me or tactfully tell him he should submit to my authority until real Head of Mission arrives. This latter wmld be most preferable. F. It is breach of agreement and unfair on Capt. Robert Low if his principals encourage him in his projects without giving him necessary status and keeping him in ignorance of true position. G. He also points out that a is soon to come here as Head of Mission with his own assistants several Arabs fourteen Yugoslavs and ten Greek agents recruited and trained in United States during last three months. This would not seem to tally with out previous information or that in your telegram to the effect that a is still preparing his own instructions. H. Finally De Chastelaine has reported B and C are now in Istanbul and seem to be dealing with S.O.E. matters. Capt. Low denies having anything, to do -with them and suggest they are maubers of American War Information Department. I would be glad if you 7sould confim this with V/ashington. SEE MY IMMEDIATELY FOLLOYOG TELEGRAM., CIPHER TELEGRAM FBQM CAIRO-  Rr. 0702. SEE MY IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING TELEGRAM.  a is Hoskins B is Gordon nC is Parker., 9 COPY  CIPHER TELEGRM DESPATCHED TO HEW YORK 28..8 42.  NO. 2952 /5.  TELEGRAMS 701/2 CAIRO TO LONDON WERE QUOTED VERBATIM WITH THE FOLLOWING COMMENTS  We had however previously heard from - ord Gienconner regarding the aircraft pos.'Ion for S.O.E. Middle East. Lord Gienconner points out that cardinal factor is that Wellingtons from bomber pool can be used for brief sorties but sorties to Jugoslavia can only be undertaken by Liberators specially adapted so that they cannot be used for other operations. Consequently A.O. C.-in. C. is not in favour of Americans using their Liberators for sorties to the Balkans. Further more A.O. c.-in-c believes that Americans could only get aircraft as a political stunt and on strength of our using them for Jugoslavia. He would not therefore look on Colonel Donovan s machines as extra to total number in Middle East but as a deduction from number that would otherwise be available for routine operations. We agree with Lord Gienconner's telegram and suggest that you get Colonel Donovan to telegraph to Captain Robert Low to the effect that he should submit to Lord Gienconner's authority until real Head of Mission arrives. Furthermore that Captain Robert Low must not repeat not initiate any plans without Lord Glenconner's approval.  We also view with some anxiety the suggestion that Americans should drop their own personnel to Mihajlovic particularly in view of the Jugoslav Army crias in Egypt where Mirkovic and other rebel officers are only .too likely to play off British and Americans.  Plese telegraph what action is taken., COPY  CIPHER TBIffCRAM RECEIVED FSDM MEW YORK  Hr. 069. 28. 8. 42.  Following for Sir Charles Hambro from Colonel Franck.  A. Have been officially informed by our Joint Staff Mission Washington that Joint United States Chiefs of Staff have approved summary prepared by United States Joint Planners of London agreement. B. Summary is document of about 300 words /hich accurately represents sense of agreement. Actual text will be brought to you. C. Only comment on agreement is recommendation by Joint Psychological Warfare Committee that agreement will be entered into concerning Spain and Portugal in near future. D. As agreement has now been ratified by United States C.O.S. I regard it as most important that the Foreign Office should not delay further in assenting formally to agreement. oOo..., COPY.  CIPHER TELEGRAY RECEIVED PROM REV/ YORK DESP 29.8.42 PECD. 29.3.42. No. 07529 To Mr. Keswick for Colonel Taylor from Louis Franck. Further to my telegram 69 to Sir Charles Ilambro.  A. Your telegram 919 para B. have requested Colonel Donovan to advise his London representative tha agreement has been ratified and that he is at liberty to discuss with you any points that might arise.   B. Your Para C. noted but in view of Washington's fosrmal ratification I hope it will be possible for you to get similar formal ratification from Our Chiefs of S- aff as we may be called upon to exchange ratifications.  C. Regarding F.O. Amendments if you do not think these are important we are strongly of opinion that they should be abandoned as if insisted upon It will mean a further delay in putting agreement into operation. Moreover it may lead to O.S.S. or U.S.A. Chiefs of Staff also wishing to put forward amendments. D. P.O.'s objection to description applying to Burma is answered in ratified summary which included Burma in category of Joint assignment of territories. This phraseology should give S.O.E. Liaison Mission here opportunity of protecting our interests should necessity arise but we are pf opinion to let 'sleeeping dogs lie. E. Regarding specific allocation of spheres which should be reviewed in light of developments of military situation this app/ears to be covered by accepted principles underlying agreement and GRP UUT made in ratified summary in notes follow ng sub paragraph four of paragraph C. which envisages alterations in accordance changing predominancy. F. j-our para. D. regarding China there is nothing to be done until Colonel Donovan's organisation gets going. Points you raise noted and agreed. G. Your para E. will wire later Colonel Donovan's reaction. II. Your para P. and G. noted., , Registry No. NOTHING TO BE WRITTEN IN THIS MARGIN.  FOREIGN OFFICE S.W.1. September 1942. P.N.L. Draft. Colonel Taylor S 0. E. I write to confirm my telephone message to you of September 2nd that my Secretary of State agrees that you should ratify your draft agreement with Colonel Donovan without amendment. You know already of two of the points which we here made namely that about Burma and that about the basic principle on which areas should be allocated to yourselves or to the Americans. The other two comments which have since been made here are as follows   l The section relating to East Africa describes your mission at Durban as being charged with working into Madagascar and Portuguese East Africa . This description strikes us as somewhat inaccurate since in fact your mission is only authorised to use Portuguese East Africa as a base for work in Madagascar and for watching Axis agents. As East Africa is laid down in the agrasment as being a British area and as Colonel Donovan s organisation have no more than the right to attach a liaison mission to your people at Durban there should be no fear of the Americans engaging in any independent activities in Portuguese East Africa. You may hov/ever think it . C A l //i/ tr ry y wise as and when opportunity offers toN-aat misunderstanding/, misunderstanding with the Americans by   making it clear to them that the activities of your mission at Durban are in fact circumscribed within narrower limits than the wording of your agreement with Colonel Donovan would seem to imply.  2 The comment has also been made here that it seems anomalous that the Canaries should fall within Colonel Donovan's sphere of activity when this is still a British military responsibility. On the other hand we regard it as being to our general advantage that the Americans rather than ourselves should be responsible for underground activities in Portuguese and Spanish territory. This is not a view which requires to be communicated to the Americans but you may like to have it on record and to communicate it to Louis Prank for his own confidential information. NOTHING TO BE WRITTEN IN THIS MARGIN., NOTHING TO BE WRITTEN IN THIS MARGIN. Minutes-   SECRET.  With the entry into the field of Colonel Donovan's American S.O.E. organisation it became urgently necessary that our own S.O.E. should negotiate a working agreement with them in order to avoid duplication and the crossing of wires to say nothing of American interference in areas of vital concern to ourselves.  Accordingly when Colonel Donovan was in London last June S.O.E. negotiated a draft agreement with him ad referendum. This agreement is summarised in the attached paper. The agreement goes into great detail and lays down the basis of S.0.E.-Colonel Donovan collaboration in all parts of the world. In so far as .it is capable of being further summarised its main provisions are as follows   1 S.O.E. will maintain a liaison mission in Washington and Colonel Donovan will maintain a similar mission in London in order to secure uniformity of policy and operation.  2 In order to avoid competing operations in different parts of the world the main areas in which the two organisations work have been divided up -and defined as being either American or British areas. In an American area the control and direction of all subversive work whether by Colonel Donovan's organisation or by S.O.E shall be conducted from Washington in a British area control shall be exercised from London. Colonel Donovan may have his own missions in British areas but they must work under the direction of the head local S.O.E. representative. Similarly S.O.E. may have missions in American areas but they must accept American control.  3 In the light of the foregoing principle the main areas in question have been parcelled out as follows - British areas. American areas. Joint areas.  which may be India. China. v/orked into East Africa. Australia. as convenient  West Africa. Atlantic by either  Middle East Islands. organisation  including Finland. Balkans . North Africa. Burma Thailand Indo china. Malaya. Sumatra.  Footnote. American missions will however be established in this area in agreemelit with S.O.E. in order to enable Colonel Donovan's organi ation to undertake subversive operations on behalf of the U. . High Command should the occasion arise .   Footnote Colonep. Donovan's organisation will also establish a mission in Cairo but it will take no action except with the approval of the lead local representative of S.O.E., , Nothing to be Written in this Margin. Minutes. S.O.E. have submitted the agreement to the Foreign Office for approval. It has now been seen by all Departments concerned and though a number of comments have been made none of them are of great importance and I do not think that I need 'trouble you with them. S.O.E. are now anxious to bring the agreement into force forthwith mainly in order to be able to exercise control over Colonel Donovan's representative in the Middle East. If we put forward amendments on our side it is more or less certain that the Americans will put forward others on theirs. Agreement will thus be retarded and the final text may not even be so good from our point of view as the present one. ' i bJu. n Tiro While fe-hn'efui e there io a certain cmrom t in this agreement that we don't much like I would recommend    l that we should inform S.O.E. that \ie approve the present text without modification and  2 that we should inform S.O.E. of the comments which have been made here and ask them to raise them with Colonel Donovan as and when opportunity offers. 1st September 1942  7 D/jn 1 K. /fa see/ &, Minutes. I informed Colonel Taylor yesterday that the Secretary of State approved S.O.E's agreement with Colonel Donovan without modification.  I am now writing to Colonel Taylor reminding him of points i and iv in my minute of September 1st of which S.O.E. are already aware and informing him of points ii and iii . There is nothing really to be said to the Americans about point iii and I am not putting point v to Colonel Taylor at all as I do not think that it would do any practical good. S.O.E. have as a matter of fact already referred this agreement to the Chiefs of Staff. I attach a copy of Brigadier Hollis's reply. 77 . / ' /7ru ft srAf/s 1/' 3rd September 1942 Nothing to be Written in this Margin., SECRET.  Paper No. 42 6.  13th August 1942.  FOREIGN OFFICE -S.O.E. COMMITTEE.  UNITED STATES OF AMERICA5 o.O.E. RELATIONS WITH COLONEL DONOVAN.  With reference to the conclusion reached on Item 4 of the Minutes of the Seventh Meeting the'following copy of a letter from Brigadier Hollis to Sir C. Hambro is circulated for the information of members of the Committee.   Signed P.N.LOXLEY.  FOREIGN OFFICE S.W.1.  13th August 1942.  Letter dated 9th August 1942 from Brigadier Hollis to Sir C. Hambro.  Reference your letter of 26th June and subsequent correspondence about joint Anglo-American S. 0. E. collaboration  The Chiefs of Staff are desirous that S.O.E. should collaborate with the Americans in so far as the security of British Secret Service interests permit with the object of ensuring unification of policy. The Chiefs of Staff are I am sure. prepared to leave it to S.O.E. to agree with the Americans the necessary machinery to give effect to the necessary collaboration bearing in mind that the interests of His Majesty's Government throughout the world are of first importance., Mimites-  NOTHING TO BE WRITTEN IN THIS MARGIN.  r-rVion T S.O.E. have submitted their agreement' to the Chiefs of Staff and the Foreign Office for approval. The former had no special comments to make. The Foreign Office Departments concerned have now studied the agreement in detail and the following are the main comments-which have emerged   i It would be better if Burma were treated as a British and not as a joint area though Colonel Donovan's organisation would have to be given the right to work into it from China. TV 5  ii British Mission in East Africa is-wrongly described as vrorking into Portuguese East Africa in fact S.O.E. are only allowed to use Portuguese East Africa as a base for work in Madagascar and for watching Axis agents.  iii It seems anomalous that the Canaries should fall within Colonel Donovan's sphere of activity when this is still a British military responsibility. On the other hand it is to our general advantage that the Americans rather than ourselves should be responsible for underground activities in Portuguese and Spanish territory. - ivVl-t would seem desirable to state explicitly somewhere in the agreement that in allocating an area to the British or the American organisation regard has primarily been had to the nationality of the Allied Commander-in-Chief in the area in question and that the present allocation is subject to review in the light of military developments.  v 'C' further tells me that he is disturbed at the lengths to which S.O.E. seem prepared to go in sharing their secrets with Colonel Donovan. The latter are bound to learn much about S.O.E. methods which have in fact been largely copied from S.I.S. and there is consequently a serious risk that many of C's own secrets will eventually leak out. He appreciates however that things have gone too far for it to be possible to draw back now. S.O.S. have now informed us a That the American Chiefs of Staff have approved the agreement as it stands.  b That if we attempt to revise it the Americans are very likely to suggest certain counter modifications on their side and that the final outcome of any fresh discussions might well lead in the opinion of the head S.O.S. representative in New York to an agreement less favourable to/, Minutes. to ourselves than the present one.   c The head S.O.E. representative in the Middle East has telegraphed to say that Colonel Donovan's I epresentative there professes to know nothing of any agreement between his organisation and S.O.E. and is preparing to go ahead with a number of operations on his own. In the view of S.O.E. it is therefore urgently desirable to bring the agreement into force at once in order that the activities of Colonel Donovan's representative in the Middle East may be controlled in the manner laid down in the agreement. I think that there is considerable force  in S.O.E's arguments as reproduced above. None of our own comments are very substantial  and while there is admittedly a good deal in  the agreement that Y/e do not much like I am inclined to think that it is as good a one as we are likely to get and that if we reopen it we may easily fare worse rather than better. Moreover unless the Americans are tied down to a hard and fast agreement they are sure to indulge in a free for all scramble which may be highly embarrassing to us in areas such as the Middle East where our interests predominate. I believe therefore that our wisest policy is to endorse the agreement forthwith without reservation.  A  f NOTHING TO BE WRITTEN IN THIS MARGIN., inoexbo  GFT/70. 1st September 1942.  S. . . A  /IK U-ri'J' /f o   vy. . rl ' wi A  -\ / W'  t 0 .  . A'/'  . lA -r   &  t lr / /-r TvW   1 /   7/   /f.   Further to our telephone conversation of this afternoon I send you herewith copies of telegrams exchanged with Cairo and New York showing how the position regarding the Agreement with Colonel Donovan has become more and more acute until it is now evident that the sooner we clinch the deal the better.  As you agreed with me on the telephone this can best be done by authorising our Liaison Fission in Washington to exchange ratifications with Colonel Donovan's neoole without raising any amendments at all. The American Joint Chiefs of S aff have approved the London Agreement without amendment and this offers us the chance to get the whole thing signed sealed and delivered before any of Colonel Donovan's people can attempt to wriggle out of it. In our opinion any delay and above all any proposals for amendment on our part which would inevitably give rise to further discussion of the Agreement as a whole would be most dangerous.  The need for the earliest possible ratifxatlon is of course best illustrated by the Middle Eastern position where it is absolutely essential that Colonel Donovan should give clear Instrxictions to his people both in Washington and in the field within the next week or so if independent action by Captain Low in Cairo and the despatch of Hoskin's Mission from Washington are to be avoided. I see little chance of such Instructions being given unless the London Agreement is ratified and brought into immediate operation.  P. Loxley Esq. Foreign Office., INDEXED  &v 4th September 1942 I write to confirm my telephone message to you of September 2nd that my Secretary of State agrees that you should ratify your draft agreement with Colonel Donovan without amendment You know already of two of the points which we here made namely that about Burma and that about the basic principle on which areas should be allocated to yourselves or to the Americans We should be gratefulif you would bear these in mind and put them to the Americans at an appropriate moment. The other two comments which have since been made here are as followa   1 The section'relating to iSast Africa describes your mission at Durban as being charged with working into Madagascar and Portuguese East Africa . This description strikes us as somewhat inaccurate since in fact your mission is only authorised to use Portuguese East Africa as a base for work in Madagascar and for watching Axis agents. As East Africa is laid down in the agreement as being a British area and as Colonel Donovan s organisation have no more than the rifeht to attach a liaison mission to your people at Durban there should be no fear of the Americans engaging in any independent activities in Portuguese East Africa. You may however think it wise as and when opportunity offers to dispel any possibility of misunderstanding with the Americans by making it clear to than that the activities of your mission at Durban are in fact circumscribed/  Colonel - P. Taylor., circumscribed within narrower limits than the wording of your agreement with Colonel Donovan would seem to imply.   2 The cement has also been made here that it seems anomalous that the Canaries should fall within Colonel Donovan s sphere of activity when this is still a British military responsibility. On the other hand we regard it as being to our general advantage that the Americans x ather than ourselves should be responsible for underground activities in Portuguese and Spanish territory. . . 1 ' '1 A.  This is not a view which requires to be communicated to the Americans but you may like to have it on record and to communicate it to Louis Prank for his own confidential information., COPY.  SECP  LONDON  9th September 1942.   CH/2398.  My dear Colonel  On your last visit to London in early June this year we both agreed and initialled a record of discussions between our officers which resulted in an agreement for the co-operation of  O.S.S and' S.O.E throughout the world on the understanding that this agreement would not come formally into force until it had been submitted to and approved by United States Joint Chiefs of Staff and the State Department on the one hand and the British Chiefs of Staff and the Foreign Office on the other.  I am happy to be able to advise you that I have received formal confirmation from both our Chiefs of Staff and the Foreign Office that they are agreeable to the arrangement reached in June coming into force as a binding agreement with no amendments of any sort I understand your authorities have taken up a similar attitude.  I therefore suggest that by an exchange of letters such as this one of mine to you and a confirmatory reply from you if you are in agreement tjie June agreement should be formally ratified between us and come into full operation immediately.  The agreement in its original form is not a very convenient one for reference consisting as it does of a record of day-to-day discussions in which the conclusions of one day are sometimes modified by the decisions of the nett. I have therefore had my people get out and attach hereto 6 copies of a consolidated version which whilst retaining the exact language of the original eliminates those parts of any discussion subsequently modified by  further conversations and which if you agree could be accepted by  both of us as the governing document for future reference.  Yours sincerely   SGD. CHA.RLES HA.MBRO  Colonel W Donovan  P.T.O., OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES. UNITED STATES COVERMill NT. 72 Grosvenor Street London. September 12 1942  Dear Sir Charles  In reply to your letter of September 9 I am very happy to confirm the June agreement recording cer tain discussions between our respective officers with a view to the co-operation of O.S.S. and S.O.E  I thank you for the copy of the consolidated version of our understanding which I accept as the governing docuraent for future reference.  Sincerely yours   SGD. WILLIAM J. DONOVAN.  Sir Charles Hambro  We both understand that we both are always subject to any amendments made by our respective Chiefs of Staff.  Sgd. DONOVAN., 3ui .ry of /.grsement between BRITISH S.0.5. and AM3RICMS.0. The following is a fairly full summary of the agreement reached in the course of discussions between officers of the British S.O.E. and the American S.O. between the 16th and 22nd June 1942 This agreement was confirmed by Sir Charles Hambro on the one side and Colonel Donovan on the other on the under standing that it would be submitted by the former to the British Chiefs of Staff and the Foreign Office and by the latter to the American Chiefs of Staff at the State Department for their approval. The principles on which this Agreement are based are as follows  1. Co-operation at Headquarters London/Wnshington The object of such co-operation is to achieve a common policy and to avoid crossing of lines in regard either to policy or to the supply of materials. For this purpose close liaison between headquarters is essential. This liaison will be effected by a British liaison section working alongside Colonel Donovan s headquartersin Washington and a similar American liaison section working alongside S.O.E. Headquarters London. The duties of this liaison section would bc -  To represent the views of their respective headquarters on all policy matters so that a common policy for every theatre can be decided on. To discuss with the headquarters to which they have been accredited cases of dispute in the field which have been referred to that headquarters. c To exchange information and to keep thoir headquarters fully informed of matters of interest. d To co-ordinate the production demand and supply of equipment from British and U.S. sources. e To exchange both operational and technical in telligence and information on methods of training. Such a liaison section might consist of one head liaison officer who would be a high level representative charged with executive functions supported by requisitestaff. --I, 2. C0-OP JR/iTIOH IN THS FIELD It is essential to avoid the situation where there will he two completely independent organisations working in the field with all the consequent dangers of crossing of linos competition for agents and material etc. and inviting attempts by foreign governments or groups with whom both organisations would be dealing to play one off against the other.  In some cases the problem will be dealt with by assigning a given region exclusively either to the American or British organisation the organisation v/hich agrees to stay out being represented at the most only by a liaison officer and a small staff  There will however be vory few of those simple cases and in most areas the position will be that whilst an area is pre dominantly a British or American sphere of influence both countrie will have some interests inside it and will need to establish some sort of representation and possibly a system of agents.  It is agreed that the general principles to bo adopted in such cases should be  a Each area should be defined as being either a British or American area.   To be inserted at the request of the Foreign Office It is understood that in allocating an area predominantly cither to the British or American organisation a main consideration will be the system of military command pre vailing in the area in question. Thus normally where the local command is American the area will -unless some special over-riding consideration applies -be allocated to American S.O. whore the command is British the allocation will be to the British S.O.E.  It is further undorstood that such allocation will be re viewed in the light of any development in the military situation thus a change in command from American to British or vico versa will be followed by a corresponding change in the allocation of the area.  b Inside a British area it will be agreed that the control and direction should bo British and that the policy should be laid down and all instructions to the Mission or Missions in that area should bo issued from London In an American area the same procedure would apply as regards Washington.  c In the field in a British area there would bo a British Mission the head of which would be Controller for the whole area and who would look for his direction and instructions to London. If the Americans so wished there could bo an American Mission in the same territory v/hich would have its own headquarters its own stations and its own agents but the American Mission and its head at those headquarters would work under the direction and control of the British con troller. The head of the American Mission could report direct to Washington on any matter he wished with a copy to the American liaison mission in London but he would receive his instructions from London and through the British controller and would only act on communications received direct from Washington with the agreement and consent of the British controller. In an American territory the same principle would apply with the roles reversed.  d In the event of a difference of opinion arising between the British or American controller and the head of the British, or Amoricon Mission inside his territory which could not  he settled locallyf the issue would he referred to London  or Washington respectively5 and it would he the responsi   hility of the headquarters in question to settle it with  the liaison mission attached to it.  Even these rather general principles may not he able to he applied strictly in all cases and it may he nec essary to make exceptions in certain countries to meet special requirements.  It was agreed that the following areas could he allocated in accordance with the foregoing principles without raising any very serious problems.  1. INDIA It was agreed that India should he regarded as a British area where all operations would he carried out hy the British Mission with control being exorcised from London. The American S.O. would have the right to send out a liaison mission to ho attached to the British Mission for liaison purposes hut not for operational purposes.  2. CHINA It was agreed that this area of which the headquarters would he at Chungking and which cover the whole of China in cluding Japanese-occupied China Manchuria and Korea should he regarded as an American sphere of influence. The American Mission would he established at Chungking and would direct all S.O. activities in this area. It would he controlled from Washington. The existing British Mission at Chungking would he reduced and would he turned into a liaison mission attached to the American Mission. The British liaison mission in addition to its liaison duties would render any assistance which it could to the American Mission hut only at the latter's request and under the latter's control.  3. AUSTRALIA It was agreed that British S.O.E. would have no res ponsibility for and would take no action in the area covered hy General MacArthur's Command and that of the American Naval Command in the South Western Pacific. This area would he considered as covering Now Guinea and the islands of the East Indian archipelago up to and including Java and Borneo. It would he for the American S.O. to make its own arrangements with the I.S.D. which already exists in Australia under General MacArthur's control. British S.O.E. would continue to give any assistance asked for to this Mission.  4. To ho inserted at the request of the Foreign Office BURMA  It was agreed that Burma should ho a British area hut that American S.O. should have the right to work into it as convenient from China.  5. SIAM. INDO-CHINA MALAYA AND SUMATRA It was agreed that those areas should he regarded as a no-man's-land which could he worked into as convenient hy the British S.O.E. Mission in India the American S.O. Mission in China and. I.S.D. in Australia. Line crossing inside this, nrcn would hove to Tdc avoided by close liaison betwoon these three missions.  6. EAST AFRIC/i It was agreed that the area covered by the British S.O.E. Mission which already exists with its headquarters at Durban charged v/ith working into Madagascar and Portuguese East Africa should bo regarded as a British area American S.O. would have the right to have a liaison mission attached to  the British Mission at Durban.  7. WEST AFRICA'. -PRAV.'EST and NEUGOLS Whilst it was agreed that the area covered by these two existing British S.O.E. Missions -namely the West African colonics from the southern boundary of Morocco to the boundary of South West Africa with Portuguese West Africa -should for the time being be regarded as predominantly a British sphere it was recognised that the American S.O. had a very definite interest in this area since if any military action on a large scale were to be undertaken by the United Nations in West Africa such action would predominantly be the responsibility of the American military authorities. The American S.O. therefore consider that they must place themselves in a position to be able to carry out S.O. services for the American Command if such a situation should arise. The following procedure was accordingly agreed upon.  American S.O. would establish Missions corresponding to our Prawost and Neucols Missions. The programme of these American Missions would be worked out in as much detail as possible between Washington and London. Copies of this agreed programme would then bo sent to the Heads of the American Missions and the Heads of the British Missions with clear instructions in both cases that the execution of this programme by the American Missions would be discussed step by step with the Heads of the British Missions and no action taken until agree ment had been reached with them. If such agreement could not be arrived at the point at issue would bo referred to headquarters to be settled between London and Washington and until decision was given no action would be taken by the American Missions It was con templated that the programme which would be worked out between London and Washington for these American Missions would be essentially preparatory in character consisting of the placing of American representatives at appropriate points the establishment of dumps of materialsthe collection of information and operational intelligence and the working out of plans against appropriate targets.  It was agreed that as had already been arranged with the Minister Resident the situation in West Africa would as regards him be analagous to that existing in Cairo and that the Head of the British Mission in West Africa would act as the link between any American Mission and the Minister Resident putting up to the latter the requirements of the American Mission and convoying to them the decisions of the Minister Resident  8. ATLANTIC ISLANDS It was agreed that these islands comprising the Azores Madeira the Canaries and the Cape Verde Islands should be regarded as an American sphere and operated by an American Mission controlled from Washington. The British S.O.E would have the right to attach liaison officers to the American, organisation.  9. FINLAND It v/as agreed that Finland should ho regarded as an American sphere and that the British S.O.E. should place all facilities and contacts useful for this country at the disposal of their American colleagues  10 RUSSIA  S.O.E.5 having explained the position regarding their liaison mission in Moscow and their agreement with the N.K.V.D. that neither party would carry out any operations in the territory of the other except hy mutual arrangement it was agreed that as the American S.O. had no intention for the present at least of dealing with Russia there was no need to work out any arrangements for collohoration for this area. A more detailed agreement was come to in regard to the following areas which present somov/hat complicated problems.  1 . BALKANS and THE MIDDLE EAST It was agreed that in view of the fact that all Military Commands in this area were British Commands that the principal political authority was the British Minister of State at Cairo and that the whole of the territorsr other than Turkey -within which and from which operations could take place or he based -was wholly or partially under British military occupation the area at present covered by the British  S.O.E. with its headquarters at Cairo should be regarded as predominantly a British area. ' At the same time it was appreciated that there were many ways in which the.American S.O. could be of groat assistance in this area. It could call upon resources in regard to equipment materials and possibly personnel which were not available to the British S.O.E. and in certain area -for example Turkey and Iran - American personnel could in some respects operate more easily than British personnel. It was accordingly agreed that the set-up should be as follows -   The controller of the existing British S.O.E. Mission would be regarded as being in charge of all S.O.E operations in that area and would be responsible for all S.O.E. activity to the local authorities -particularly the S.O.E. Sub-Committoo of the Minister of State's War Council -and to headquarters in London. An American S.O. Mission should be set up in Cairo with the object of providing such assistance as it could to the British S.O.E and of contributing to the British  S.O.E. services which would only be available from the American side. The form and extent of the organisation of the American Mission and also the scope and character of its activities would be discussed and settled by the Head of the American Mission with the British Controller under whom ho would be working. In the event of failure to roach agreement the issue would be referred to headquarters to be settled between London and Washington and in the meantime the views of the Controller would prevail. The Hoad of the American Mission would communicate direct with Washington on any matter he pleased but it would be clearly laid down that as regards any action the American Mission would look to the Controller for direction and instructions and would take no action except with, -6  i.ls npprovol.  With regnrd to ouch cor.raunicotions hety/een V/ashington ond the Head of the inericnn Mission in Cniroj it was agreed that all such telegrams -whether originating from Washington or Cairo -should he repeated to the American Mission attached to S.O E. London. It was also agreed that it would he the responsibility of the American Mission in London to Iceep British S.O.E. informed as to the content of all such messages which affect British interests. It was agreed that if the American Mission set up their own War Station in Cairo it would he used only for communications with Washington as the  War Station belonging to S.O.E. Mid-East is already adequate for handling all communications with agents in the field.  The substantial effect of this arrangement would be that there would be a single S.O.E. machine in the area at the head of which would bo the present Controller but that under him there would be two organisations namely the existing British S.O.E. organisation covering the whole area of the Mission and a small American organisation which would be fitted by the Controller into the general programme wherever it could help.  In regard to the question of supplies of equipment from America to S.O.E. Mid-East it was pointed out that such equipment comes under two categories namely  a Scrvico equipment including aircraft naval craft arms ammunition medical stores building materials transport parachutes containers clothing and field telephones and  b Non-Service specialised equipment including explosives sabotage devices W/T sets War Station and broadcasting equipment etc.  With regard to the former it was pointed out that S.O.E. is the British Government department created for waging subversive warfare but that the G-in-C Mid-East is responsible for all operations in that theatre of war. S.O.E. plans must therefore conform to C-in-C's operational requirements and to the strategic requirements of the Chiefs of Staff They arc therefore submitted to C-in-C for his concurrence ond in carrying them out S.O.E. are acting as his agents.  It was remarked that this machinery has been set up to enable the combined Chiefs of Staff to pool the resources of the United States and Great Britain and allocate them to the various theatres of war having regard also to transport facilities. It was accordingly agreed that it will therefore be impossible for S.O.E. Mid-East to make direct application to the American S.O. for equipment of this typo. It was con sidered however that if the American S.O. can become possessed of aircraft scacraft etc. it might be possible for them to send them to their own Mission in the Middle East and place them at the disposal of the British S.O.E. organisation. In doing this however it would be necessary for the American S.O. to send their own crews and spares etc. so that the aircraft could be serviced as an independent unit and it is clear that even this plan would involve negotiations with the military authorities in Egypt. Nevertheless it was agreed that S.O.E. London should make up a list of equipment in this category of which they stand in need and supply it to the American S.O.  Regarding Non-Scrvice equipment it was pointed out that the British S.O.E. arc themselves manufacturing all their own special devices and W/T sots. At the same time it was agreed, 7  that there v/as a shortage of certain types of W/T sots and  broadcasting equipment Accordingly it was agreed that  S.O.E. London should make up a list of their requirements under this heading and supply it to the American S 0. and it was agreed that so far as this equipment was concerned there could be no objection to the American S.O. either Despatching it to their American Mission in the Middle East or  b supplying it direct to S.O.S. Mid East.  Regarding personnel it v/as explained that there is believed to be a shortage of 7/T operators in the Middle East and that it would be useful that if say 10 trained 7/T operators could bo attached to the American Mission for work in the S.O.E. Mid East War Station near Cairo. It was also pointed out that S.O.E Mid East to-day recruits the majority of its Greek 'and Jugoslav personnel from their respective armies and that it was desirable to obtain nationals of those two countries and of Bulgaria Romania and Hungary from other quarters. Such personnel should be trained as W/T operators and as expert organisers for infiltration into occupied   countries where they can assist friendly elements to organise passive resistance sabotage and revolt.  2. WESTERN EUROPE It was agreed that in any attempt to arrive now at arrangements for co-operation in this sphere it was necessary to take into account the distinction between countries likely  to be invaded by the Allied forces and those not likely to be so immediately affected and also to allow for at least two distinct phases in the development of the situation set out below.  On this basis the following detailed agreement was reached.  A. INVASION SPHERE This sphere covers Norway Holland Belgium and Prance.  Arrangements for collaboration v/ould have to go through at least two phases of which only the first could be discussed in detail at the present time. This first phase would be one in which tho British S.O.E. v/ould continue very much as it is at present working both on the development and operation of a field force of agents in each of the countries concerned and on the building up of an S.O.E. liaison organisation for attachment to the appropriate Military Commands to accompany them to the Continent whilst the American S.O. concentrated on preparatory work at the same time giving such assistance as they could to the British.S.O.E. in its task of operating the field force abroad. This phase would end as soon as the stage was reached when the question arose of an S.O.E. liaison organisation attached to an American Command taking over the actual operation of a field force abroad.  FIRST PHASE  a Organisation in tho Field  It was agreed that it was essential that tho field force in each of tho four countries concerned should continue to be treated as one whole the object being to create throughout the area likely to be invaded by Allied Forces a single, 8  United Nations Fifth Golnmn organisation to ho at the disposal of the Allied invading force -whether American or British. This would mean in practice that the American S.O. Mission in England would not with the exception of the case referred to at the end of this paragraph put agents of their own into these countries who would function separately from the existing field force and who would he operated separately hy them from a London If agent personnel were available from American sources it would he treated exactly like agent personnel available from other sources and infiltrated hy the existing headquarter organisation into the appropriate country to work as part of the one existing field force'there. In effect during this first phase there would he no change in the character or method of operation of the field force abroad the American S.O. simply contributing such assistance as they could in regard to personnel equipment facilities intelligence etc. The typo of assistance particularly envisaged hy the British S.O.E. representatives was passports air transport and assistance regarding dollar transactions.  The exception referred to above is the case of American representation at Vichy. It was appreciated that as long as the United States retain diplomatic relations with the Vichy Government it was possible for the American S.O. to havew an organisation based on their diplomatic mission inside Vichy France and in fact they have made all arrangements to establish such representation. It was further recognised that American S.O. representatives in Vichy would inevitably make contacts and create though perhaps not on a large scale a. system of agents. It was agreed that such a field force should not as far as could at present be seen have any direct connection with the normal S.O.E. field force in France. At the same time to avoid confusion it was agreed that  i this Vichy organisation would be operated by the American Mission in London and not by Washington direct and  ii that the S.O Mission in London would operate in closest collaboration and in accord with the general direction of the British S.O.E. French Region.  b Liaison Organisation  It was agreed that the American S.O. would concentrate primarily upon the recruitment and training of liaison staff v/hich would eventually be attached to the American Commands in order to provide for the latter S.O. services in the areas in which they would be operating. It was envisaged that the American S.O. would recruit this personnel in the United States give them preliminary training there and then send them to England for further training. Such recruitment and training would of course be the responsibility of the American S.O. but the British S.O.E. would place all training facilities in England at their disposal-. The American S.O would of course only require to recruit liaison personnel for attachment to American Commands with qualifications for operating in those countries which would be invaded by American forces. It was considered probable that a sufficiently definite indication of these countries could be obtained at an early date. As soon as such indication had been given British S.O.E. would.cease  to recruit and train liaison personnel for those countries which had been allocated to American Commands.  At least a certain proportion of the American S.O. liaison personnel would have to bo given as part of their training an, -9   intimate knowledge of the field organisation with which they would have eventually to work and this could only he done hy training them in the country sections concerned at British  S.O.E. Headquarters. SECOND PHASE  This phase would commence as indicated above when not only had there been a definite indication between British and American forces but when also the American S.O. liaison personnel for attachment to American Commands had been more or less completely organised and the question arose as to whether they ought not to take over the operation of the field force in the areas in which they were going to function. It was agreed that it would be impossible at this stage to lay down arrangements to cover this contingency since so much would depend upon factors v/hich are at present unknown e.g. the actual allocation of the Commands the imminence of the invasion itself etc.  Thus if Norway were allocated to the United States Forces it would be comparatively simple once they had reached the   necessary stage of development for the American S.O. liaison organisation attached to the American Command for this area to take over the operation of the field force in Norway absorbing for the purpose as much as was necessary of the country section which had hitherto been running it. On the other hand it would almost certainly be impracticable to split up the control of the field organisation in the area comprising the Low Countries and France since not only would the field force in France form a whole which could not be divided between two separately controlling headquarters in London but also the activities of the field force throughout this area once the invasion had started would be of more or less equal importance to all parts of the Allied Line except in the areas immediately behind the actual fighting. For example sabotage activities in the area of Liege of Luxembourg or of Chalons could be equally useful to British forces fighting in the Low Countries and North-Eastern France or American forces fighting in the region of Rouen or Amiens. A good deal will obviously depend upon the form of military command eventually    established and it might be found that if the supreme Command headquarters for the whole area were established in England the concentration of the whole S.O. Headquarters with that Command would be the best solution. It was accordingly agreed that the way in which the control of the field force v/hich during the first phase would be concentrated in the British S.O.E. Head quarters should be allocated between the British and American organisations and would have to be v/orked out gradually as the situation clarified. B. NON-INVASION SPHERE This sphere covers such countries as Germany Italy Switzerland Poland Czechoslovakia and Sweden The con clusions reached regarding the way in which collaboration should be effected in these areas can conveniently be set out under the three following headings  Poland and Czechoslovakia  In regard to these tv/o countries the secret armies and other underground resistance organisations are operated by the Governments of the countries concerned so the role of S.O.E. v/hether British or American will continue to be essentially that of providing them with all possible assistance. It was, -10-.  recognised thnt the British S.O.E. hove nlrondy hcon working for a considorahlotime on the joh of assisting Poles and Czechs and co-ordinating their activities with the strategic policy laid down hy the Chiefs of Staff Committee and that at any rate for some time to come the role of the American Mission would only he that of providing assistance which they could make available more easily than the British. jj  It was agreed that in order to avoid line-crossing  a all dealings with the Poles and Czechs in regard to S.O.E. activities would be carried out by the American Mission in London and not by Washington direct and  b whether as a result of an approach by the Poles or Czechs or on their own initiative the American S.O. Mission in London would not make any arrangements for the giving of assistance to these Allies without first consulting the British S.O.E. and concerting the measures proposed with them.  Germany and Italy  It was agreed that at any rate at the present stage there was no need to insist upon a single S..O.E. field force in t lose two countries and that there would probably be room for a long time to come for separate British and American organisations working in these areas. At the same time it was recognised as obviously essential if line-crossing wore to be avoided that there must be some clearing house' for the operations of the two organisations. It was agreed  a as far as American S.O. was concerned Germany and Italy would be operated by the S.O.E. Mission in London and not by Washington direct.  b that the American S..0. Mission and the British S.O.E. Headquarters should work in the strictest collaboration in regard to these two countries keeping each other fully advised ns to progress and policy and that they should endeavour as far as possible to allocate exclusively to one or the other the various contacts and channels available. M  Sweden and Switzerland  Special problems arise in connection with these two countrios since they represent bases from which work can be carried on into several areas .  a Sweden  It was rc&ogniscd that the American S..0. would wish to establish representation in Stockholm.. It was pointed out by the British representatives that their present  Mission in Stockholm was engaged on four separate functions namely work into Norway work into Denmark whore wo work for S.I.S. as well as for ourselves and preparations for post-occupational work in Sweden itself and work into Germany. It was pointed out that whilst with work into  Germany tho general principle laid down in paragraph b above could have been easily applied and would have involved no very close connection between the American S..0. represent ative in Stockholm and tho British S O.E. Mission there work into Norway Denmark and Sweden itself was a much more delicate business. As regards Norway it was clear that activities in this country must be governed by the arrangements  t .U', 11  for Invasion Countries set out rfbovo in Section A nncl thnt it \7oulci be irapossilile for the Aracricr'.n S.O. represontotivo in Stockholm to opurntc nny field force in Norv/ny.  As records the other three countries it wos ngreed thnt he should v/ork in the closest possible collnhorntion nnd in nccerdnncc with the generr.l direction of the herd of the British S.O.E. Mission in Stockholm   k Switzorlond  Switzerlnnd is n hose for work into Germnny Itnly nnd France. It was felt however that unlike Stockholm it would probably be sufficient if it were agreed thnt nny American  S.O. representative in Switzerland should be operated by the American S.O. Mission in London and not by Washington direct and that the American S.O. Mission in London should in this connection work in the strictest collaboration with the British S.O.E. Headquarters each keeping the other fully advised with regard to progress and policy and that they should endeavour to allocate as far as possible exclusively to one or the other the various contacts and channels available. With London thus being used as a clearing house it was felt that it would not bo ncccssrry or perhpas not even advisable for the local representatives in Switzerland to have any connection with each other.  3. FORTH AFRICA AND THE IBERIAH PENINSULAR A Forth Africa and Gibraltar  The following provisional arrangement was arrived at in regard to this aroa  i North Africa including Spanish Morocco to be regarded as predominantly an American sphere of influence.  The American S.O. to establish the Mission for North Africa the head of which would be responsible for S.O.E. activities in that area. The existing British organisation would continue and its personnel would remain administratively and operationally responsible to a British head but the latter would  operate under the general direction and control of the American head of the Mission machinery will bo set up to this end.  iii General policy would be agreed between Washington and London and instructions would be issued by Washington to the American Head of the Mission a copy of any such agreed instructions would be sent from London to the head of the British organisation.  iv Gibraltar as an S.O.E base from which supplies of arms and equipment transport facilities and W/T facilities are made available would remain outside the area of the North African Mission and under the control of the head of the British S.O.E. organisation.  v In order to ensure the closest co-operation and liaison between the Mission and the local British civil and military authorities machinery will be sot up which will enable the Governor and G-in-0 Gibraltar and the Britifh, 12  Consul-Gonerol Tnngicr to exercise the necessnry supervision and eo-ordinetion  B SPAIN nNE PORTUGAL  In view of the fnct that 8.0.3. activities in Portugal  other than the use of Lisbon as n base for the creation of M lines of communication into Franco have been practically reduced to nothing by the decision of the British Ambassador and the Foreign Office and of the fnct that British activities in Spain are to all intents and purposes directed and controlled by the British Naval Attache in Madrid it was agreed that there was no need to come to a detailed agreement regarding collaboration between the British and American S.O.G.s in this territory in the course of the present discussions. Such collaboration as was possible could bo worked out in due course on the spot between the present American S.O. re presentative at Lisbon and Madrid -or by his successor if he were removed -and the local British representatives.  It was indicated by the S.O.E. representatives that it might bo very convenient to have the American S.O. handle the few W/T contacts loft to the British S.O.E. in Portugal.  It was made clear that the section operating in Lisbon on lines of communication into Franco would not bo included in any arrangements for collaboration in the Iberian Peninsula proper., , ARCHIVES FILE NUMBER SUBJECT . It Amcivica AMERICA ANGLO-AMERICAN n No. 17 S.O.E. NEGOTIATIONS. TALKS IN LONDON VOLUME June 1942. f FROM TO RS 7 91214,  /f v4r L-v - cvu. it c ' rcte i S 7w '   'I -' jmsrs.   t yk u 9  fej  ifefe' . r vr X REF, 4  /  Qju'olfi-   This enclosure was missing when S.O.E. FILES were taken over hy ARCHIVES in January 196 ., SOE/434 TO ACSS ONLY  Cum f  CIPHER TELEQRAM RECEIVED FROM CAIRO DESP 2010 7/6/42 RECD 0747 8/6/42 C.K. /  1934 OA   fiii YOUR ALPHA 299/300 JUNE 1ST Q WE AQREE THAT THERE S PRIM.A FACIE LOGICAL BASIS ON WHICH PROPOSED SUPPLY PROCEDURE IS MAINTA1NED BUT IT MUST BE REMEMBERED THAT WHEREAS ADDITIONAL AIRCRAFT CAN ARRIVE AT VERY SHORT NOTICE STORES IN SUFF10 IENTLY LARQE QUANTITIES WOULD TAKE OVER 3 MONTHS TO ARRIVE. YOUR 8UQQESTED PROCEDURE THAT WE SHOULD APPLY TO CONSIGNMENT BOARD ONLY IF C IN C CANNOT SUPPLY WOULD NOT OVERCOME DIFFICULTY OF HAVING AIRCRAFT AVAILABLE FOR MANY WEEKS BEFORE STORES ARRIVED.  2. ARMY HERE HAVE ALWAYS BEEN WILLING CO-OPERATE. THEY HAVE HOWEVER BEEN OPERATING ON MOST SLENDER MARGIN ESPECIALLY SINCE FAR EASTERN CAMPAIGN BEGAN. ARMAMENTS NOW ARRIVING ARE ALREftlOY EARMARKED FOR POLISH FORCES AMD FOR MAKING GOOD EARLIER DIVERSIONS TO OTHER THEATRES. HENCE ARMY IS NOT IN POSITION TO SATISFY  ISUDDEN LARGE DEMAND FROM US SUCH AS WOULD OCCUR IF WE RECEIVED GREATLY INCREASED TRANSPORT FACILITIES UNLESS OF COURSE CHIEFS OF STAFF DIRECTED C IN C'S HERE TO SUPPLY US ON AN ADEQUAJRy HIGH PRIORITY. THIS WOULD PROBABLY MEAN DIVERTING EQUIPMENT FROM NORMAL MILITARY FUNCTION OR EVEN WITHDRAWING IT FROM UNITS.  3. OWING TO LOCAL SHORTAGES WE HAVE UP TO DATE ONLY DRAWN ON ARMY FOR OUR REQUIREMENTS WHICH HAVE ALWAYS BEEN WELL BELOW OUR ESTIMATES. AS ARMY POSITION IS BEGINNING TO IMPROVE SLOWLY AND OUR STORAGE FACILITIES HAVE BEEN INCREASED WE PROPOSE IN FUTURE TO DRAW UP TO OUR FULL ESTIMATES AND THUS CREATE RESERVE. QUANTITIES THUS AMASSED WILL NOT REPEAT NOT HOWEVER COVER VERY LARGE INCREASE ACTIVITY  SEE MY IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING TELEGRAM  P 092 0 8/6/42 WN, RD  LOCAL NOo195  Ctass  CIPHER TELEQRAH RECEIVED FROM CAIRO. DESP 2025 7.6.42.  OHV  1935 H RECD 0115 8.6.42.  tfo.  SEE MY IMMEDIATELY PRECEDINO TELEGRAM    MOREOVER SHOULD ARMY SUDDENLY RUN SHORT OWING TO OPERATIONS WE SHOULD CLEARLY HAVE TO OFFER OUR RESERVE TOWARDS THE COMMON f. NEED.  4. OUR ESTIMATES OF REQUIREMENTS SUBMITTED TO ARMY MUST MOREOVER BE BASED UPON TRANSPORT FACILITIES WHICH WE CAN SOBERLY EXPECT TO COMMAND. ARMY CANNOT BE EXPECTED TO HAND OVER EQUIPMENT IN QUANTITIES WHICH COULD BE USED ONLY IN EVENT OF .NCQR.MUT.D IMPROBABILITY.  5. WE ARE APPLYING TO BE GIVEN HIGH PRIORITY FOR ISSUE OF SUITABLE EQUIPMENT CAPTURED IN CURRENT BATTLE AND HOPE THAT THIS REQUEST MAY BE GRANTED6 THIS MAY MATERIALLY INCREASE OUR RESERVE.  6. FOREGOING SHOWS HOW VALUABLE WOULD BE EVEN ONE GpSTANTIAL ALLOTMENT AMERICAN EQUIPMENT. WE COULD TUfirfUSE BRITISH RESOURCES FOR OURCURRENT OBERATION7S KEEPING AMERICAN EQUIPMENT KH IN RESERVE AGAINST SUDDEN MAJOR CALL IT IS ONLY FAIR TO SAY HOWEVER THAT OFFICIAL ARMY VIEW IS THAT ALL ARMS ARRIVING FROM WHATEVER SOURCE SHOULD COME C.IN C WHO WILL ALLOTlPRIORITY OF  ARMS'ACCORDiNG TO CURRENT SITUATION. ANY 7AMERICAN SHIPMENT DIRECT TO S.O.E WOULD THEREFORE HAVE TOCOME AS A PERSONAL ATION ARRANGED 3Y G.50000 ON HIS OWN RESPONSIBILITY AND WITHOUT PREJUDICE TO'TONNAGES ARRANGED THROUGH NORMAL tPROCEDURE. OUR POSITION IS THAT WHEREAS WE WOULD GREATLY WELCOME IT WE DO NOT REPEAT NOT FEEL THAT IN FAIRNESS TO CS.IN.C. WE CAN PRESS FORST. ' '  TP AT 08.17 8.6.42. J.C., TU  SOE/198 LOCAL  acnssE  CIPHER TELEGRAM RECEiVED FROM CAIRO DESP 2016 7/6/42 RECD.0950 8/6/42  SEE MY IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING TELEGRAM  POSITION AS TO AIRCRAFT IS AS FOLLOWS IF WHEN IT IS PROPOSED TO SEND SMALL UNITS OF SAY 4/6 AIRCRAFT WITH GROUND ORGANIZATION R.A.F. WOULD WELCOME IT AMD WOULD PROBABLY SUGGEST THAT ST SHOULD BE ATTACHED TO SUB UNIT NOW CHARGED WITH S.O.E. TRANSPORTATION ACTIVITIES. R.AaF. WOULD SUGGEST THAT PLANNING OF OPERATIONS SHOULD REMAIN THEIR RESPONSIBILITY BOTH IN ORDER TO SAVE OVER HEADS IN PLANNING STAFF AND TO FACILITATE ARRANGEMENTS. DIVERSIONARY  BOMBING FIGHTING SWEEPS ETC.  8. IF ON OTHER HAND AMERICAN PROPOSAL IS FOR LARGER FORCE SAY ONE SQUADRON OR MORE R.A.F. VIEW WOULE BE THAT THIS FORCE CONSIDERED AS PART OF COMMON POOL AVAILABLE FOR BOMBING OR ANY OTHER SUITABLE AIR OPERATIONS IN ACCORDANCE WffH TACTICAL PRIORITIES OF THE MOMENT. POSITION WOULD THEREFORE BE SHAT S.O.E. WOULD REMAIN ONE APPLICANT AMONG OTHERS AGAINST A COMMON POOL BUT OUR CHANCE OF BEING GRANTED SORTIES WOULD OF COURSE BE INCREASED BY STIPULATING THAT LARGER NUMBERS OF AIRCRAFT AVAILABLE.  TP 1205 8/6/42 WNo, in  LOCAL 247.  CIPHER 1968.  8. D  TELEGRAM FROM CAIRO. DESP.' 2140 8 6.42   ZlflSS CL 11  RECD. 0215. 9.6.42.  DtV' y  LONDON 1968 NEW YORK 7. FOLLOWING PERSONAL AND SECRET FOR COLONEL DONOVAN. FROM MINISTER OF STATE CAIRO  1 HOPE VERY MUCH YOU WILL MAKE OPPORTUNITY IN LONDONV TO DISCUSS INCREASED USE OF GOLD COINAGE FOR SUBVERSIVE PURPOSES IN MIDDLE EAST AREA. HITHERTO RELATIVELY SMALL SUMS HAVE BEEN USED CHIEFLY FOR SUPPORT OF RELIEF FORCES TO ENABLE THEM TO RECEIVE LOCAL SUPPLIES C FOOD ETC. TO SUBORN ENEMY ARMY CGRP. HUT PROVIDE FOR AGENTS REQUIRE- MENTS AND TO A LIMITED EXTENT FOR BRIBERY. LIMITING FACTORS SO AR IN EFFECTIVE USE OF MONEY WEAPON HAVE BEEN TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION DIFFICULTIES.  AS I SEE IT PRINCIPAL USES ARE AS FOLLOWS -   C15 PAY FOR IRREGULAR FORCES. C2 PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES AND EQUIPMENT LOCALLY AND  FROM ENEMY. C3 SUBVERT ENEMY FORCES.- C4 SUPPORT LOCAL GUERRILLA LEADERS IN BALKAN COUNTRIES  OR INDUCE DOUBTFUL PRO-AXIS ELEMENTS TO CHANGE SIDES OR UNDERTAKE SABOTAGE AT RIGHT MOMENT.  C5 PAY FOR UNDERGROUND ORGANIZATIONS. REQUIREMENTS OF COURIERS SABOTE URS AGENTS CAIQUES S K I P P R S BRIBES FOR UNAUTHORIZED TRAVEL.  C6 BRIBING THOSE IN HUGH PLACES AS OPPORTUNITY OFFERS  C7 AVOIDING BANDITRY IBYjQUERRiLLA LEADERS BY ENABLING THEM TO PAY FOR SUPPLIES AND THUS AVOID AROUSING HOSTILITY OF LOCAL POPULATION.  CSD ' .G ' PROVISION OF SMALL ST01ES OF GOLD IN AREAS SUCH AS TURKEY IRAQ AND IRAN AGAINST POSSIBLE EVENT POST-OCCUPATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.  THIS.. DOES NOT EXHAUST POSSIBILITY OF USE BUT COVERS CHIEf REQUIREMENTS THAT GOLD SHOULD BE USED WITH GREAT CARE AND DISCRETION GOES WITHOUT SAYING. I AM .OPPOSED TO ANY LARGE SCALE USE PARTICULARLY THIS' STAGE. IPROPOSE CONTINUJNGTO .TAKE PERSONAL INTEREST IN THESE MATTERS AND WILL SEE THERE IS NO WASTAGE.  A RESERVE OF 750000. TO BE DRAWN AGAINST AS7REQUIRED SHOULD MEET PROBABLBHEEDS FOR SAY NEXT SIX MONTHS.  IN VIEW OF OUR DISCUSSION ON THIS SUBJECT FOLLOWING MY TALK WITH PRESIDENT I WOULD WELCOME YOUR VIEWS AND YOUR SUPPORT. HOPE VERY MUCH WE CAN AGREE.  DR-M-   TP COPIED AT 1240. 9.6.42., ADZ/US/973  TO A.D. Copy to AD/U  AGENDA FOR 0 50000 s VISIT.  Reference your memorandum AD/XX/2152 of 5.6.42. the following are points arising out of W/T and Devices Sections which should be taken up with 0.50000 during his forthcoming visit  1. RESEARCH AKD DEVELOPMENT.  a w/T. I should like to know what are G.50000 s intentions as regards research and development on W/T apparatus suitable for work under his charter. We feel there is a definite need for close liaison in respect to this and that the Americans should be allotted a specific task and we should have the benefit of their research and they the benefit of ours. What we are afraid of is that both will conduct research on the same subject and there will be the usual duplication.  b Devices. So far as we know G.50000 has no Devices Research institute and the Devices he has so far produced are Chinese copies of our own. Again we do not wish to have duplication in respect of research. 2. PRODUCTION. W/T and Devices. Our proposal here is whole-hearted co-operation with the Americans and in fact we propose that there should be a frank interchange of stock and production figures so that the proper balance can be kept on both sides -both qualitatively as well as quantitatively.  3. LIAISON. We would suggest that two Liaison Officers should /be, -2   be appointed -one on W/T and one on Devices who  should pay periodic visits to the U.S.A. to discuss both research and production matters I think it better for the liaison to be carried from this  country to America rather than the other way round. It would not of course exclude their sending people over here but regular liaison should be from east to west rather than from west to east a, MZ/2X/812. 6 6 42.  To M From MX  Conference with G and Gr 50 000.  As far as tlie Czechs and Poles are concerned there is the general question of American approaches to Czech and Polish officials on the subject of their secret organisations and if it were possible the desirability of laying down some hard and fast rule by which there was no question of the Americans and our selves competing for Czech and Polish favours.  The other main outstanding question is the Polish efforts in South America. This is a subject of which no one here has or can have any first hand knowledge and I suggest that the only solution is to place Gr or G.50 000 in direct contact with Librach.  As far as the periodical surveys which Cs staff undertake on Slav opinion in the U.S.A are concerned these are of definite value to this section and should if possible be continued.  I myself would very much like to meet G while he is over here if that could be arranged in order to find out from him what his idee.s are concerning the use that might be made of Czech and Polish nationals.  The German Section would like to know what has happened to G.415. This man was over here for some time. He went through a complete course of training including parachute jumping and made an extremely good impression on everyone. He went through the course with a first class party of Frenchmen who are going out into the field. He therefore has a very good idea of our system of training and of the type of recruit who is willing to undertake really dangerous work for patriotic reasons. As he was formerly an agent of ours recruited by us we are  /naturally, naturally most anxious that his services should he used to the full in the States. 1/i/hat are his present activities I, Addendum to the Agenda for discussion with G and G50.000  Count CZERNIN has a project for dropping certain members of the Austria Action back into Austria and among other things has volunteered to go himself. There are obvious political objections to him personally going back but if we could select some of his henchmen who would not offend other political susceptibilities it might be a good egg and make a little competition which is desirable in my view.  The difficulty is that the Austria Action is under the aegis of G.50.000. IS.6., t - 2A I 0 O 4 2  ADZ/TTS/974  TO. Sit FRO . AD/Z Copy to A/I  .AlriSlillri i4vi\ U- a loXx   Bef 6ij6nde- ii 4fit rsi'ifixii 'AIy/jLX 2l52''or.'5.Q 42 4 the  fol owlng'-points- toiilcl lje taken -up with G during hi fo ' tl'icaairvg visit - ' v'  1 -teBIKR BAPRytS .IRBLiSSS ITT QTX toil tORTR A1TD SOTITIi.  MSM7  This has arisen in rtthor .acute Toi as it appears we are likely to he cohited toith large aims of money respect of this-project Ilolther S/vnor AT-ffcj have-seen plans despite the fact that when I vms in Hew fork I specifically asked that plans he given us for considemtior Since that date however- -. Gambler Tarry has consistently refused to divtilge any infomatipn on .the-subyeat.  Fron a purely financial tochr.lcal point of view. I would like S.O.E. to wash their hands of thowhole nattoi hut it raay he that there is as operationai aapeet from your point of. view which wouM necessitate oixT swclldwlng our pride and coning to terms with far nd G on the subject.  I may add that up to the present . apart fron the delivery of valves we have had little or no co-operation from G.142 G s radio expert.  2.LIAXSORWITHTHE AMERICANS -ONR5SEAEGHhfifgLOTMfkTA 1I V. s pBLies.. --. 11. .7 It ia really for you to decide whether we should work through G or whether we should have direct contact with G.5000CU Personally I am in favour of having a filter in the shape of G.  /Devices, Devices. ' V/a have Preotli and Billingjaurat -two 0 8. men virtually conducting G.50000 suDevices production nrograrne. Ar w to continiio to woi K tnrougli G P.S. We have of course discussed all this ad nauseu hut I have penned the above for the sake of form., 'X  Copy for A.D.  U/US/I852.' i8.6.42.  1 To AD/U. Oopy to A.D. . From U.   -   rr-r K  'r N1842 i Hotes for Agenda for discussion  with G .  i D.2 ... station tMl. This question was raised by G.T.l. See x attached memo U/US/1800 .  Activity Pictures. Also raised by G.T.l. See attached memo U/US/1798 and copies of cables No.2063 to New York and 99201 from New York. These latter show that G is not fully aware of faots. Liaison with t0 in South America. See memo ADU/AHS/29 ched and draft cable submitted by  S.O. in Paraguay. At the present time we have no representa tive in Paraguay It isvun important country but is strategically placed alongside the German colonies in South Brasili It will be difficult to find a local Englishman to act though the Bank of London has a branch in Paraguay. It is open to discussion whether we should not at any rate have an observer agent1' there. See Lingeman s cable No.04505 2nd attached. s manufacture of pistols for dropping oyer occupied terrl This matter has been handled by M and will resumably be taken up with 'G' by him.  The points'at issue are clearly set out in cables 83819 from New York and 2021 to New York 94628 from New York and 2079 to New York. Cooperation with M.o.I. in Latin America. This has been agreed in principle End the tf.o.i have sent us some general suggestions as to how we can assist them. See attached report of interview ADUl/AMS/90 between AD/U.l U.l and Bonham Garter of M.o.I. The latter is getting out detailed suggestions for us.  We should discuss with G the practical methods of carrying into effect any suggestions M.o.l. make. Presum ably under existing conditions we shall have to get F.O. approval of anything we wish to do and cue man will have to keep his YP informed. I have told Bonham Carter that on general principles I consider it most unwise that our man should be in touch directly with the M.o.I. local representa tive. Any specific operations that they wish to have carried out should be passed to us here and by us to New York There may be occasions when cooperation between the two men on the spot is necessary but these should be restricted as  ch as possible and coordination leit to the local YP.  Future of 8.T.8.103. This has bedn the subject of cables and will no doubt be raised by MU A memorandum on the subject by G.T.l. is attached GTl/02 /l840 .  THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958, AD/XX/2250 13th June 1942  TO C.D. PROM A.D.  AGSKDA FOR G.50 OOP.  1 set out hereunder the subjects which as a result of the replies to the circular sent out to Directors appear to require discussion with 0.50 000. I am adding my comments as to how I would suggest they should be discussed attaching relevant papers.  1. WORLD-WIDE AGREEMENT FOR COOPERATION BETWEEN BRITISH AND AMERICAN S.O.E. IN VARIOUS FIELDS. Discussion on this problem will of course be handled by you personally. You have already received a paper summaris ing the conclusions reached at our meeting yesterday afternoon.  2 RELATIONS OF G.50 000 WITH ALLIED GOVERNMENTS. This also should be handled by you at any rate initially though detailed discussion of the situation in relation to particular governments could then be handed over to the Directors concerned. There is no paper to attach on this subject since the principle to which you want to get G.50 000 to agree Is al ready quite clear and has now been stated by you already this morning.  3. METHODS OF OBTAINING SPECIAL SUPPLIES OF EQUIPMENT OR MATERIAL FROM G.50 000 FOR BRITISrl S.O.E. ORGANISATIONS OR AMERICAN ORGANISATIONS IN BRITISH FIELDS OF INFLUENCE. Beyond broaching with G.50 000 the broad principle  if you agree with it that we ought not to go behind the local Cs.4n-C in the field or the munitions board at head quarters as this cannot in the long run be in the best interest of the war effort I think you should leave the discussion of this problem to the Directors concerned -which in practice will amount to leaving it to A/D.3 since Cairo is the area in which this problem is actual. I attach hereto at 3. for your information a paper prepared by A/D.3 which covers this subject together with a telegram from Cairo 1934 at 3a. which states their view with which we do not altogether agree.  4. SUPPLY OF GOLD FROM AMERICAN SOURCES TO THE MINISTER OF STATE CAIRO THROUGH THE GOOD OFFICES OF G.50 000. I suggest that you could leave discussion on this specific point to A/D.3. I attach hereto at 4. a copy of the Minister of State's telegram to G.50 000 on this subject which is selfexplanatory., 2  5. LIAISON WITH TIS AMBRICAHS KEGARDIHG RESEARCH DElilflEliSMT MD PRODUCTION WORK. I suggest that this can be left for discussion with A/DZ but I attach here at 5. a paper from him whifih explains what is in his mind.  6. RELATIONS OF G.50 000 'WITH POLISH ORGANISATIONS. This is connected with the subject of paragraph 2. above but I strongly recommend that MX should meet G.50 000 and put his points himself. It attach at 6. a short paper from MX which indicates what he wants to talk about.  7. AUSTRIA ACTION. MX also wishes to discuss a project with G.50 000 which involves the use of Austria Action which is now under his aegis I attach at 7. MX's paper on this subject.,  1 a in any case is much wider than our own.   2 ..   3  4 Some Comments on the forthcoming Talks about Go-operation between British and American S.O E  It seems desirable that the terms of reference of the  new amalgamated bodies should be defined. Colonel Donovan's  sphere of activity does not seem to have yet been exactly  decided/ In view however of our painful experiences with   G and the M. of I. the limitation of the combined S.O.E.  activities in relation to these departments should be agreed.  Colonel D. seems to have strong leanings towards 'G and  Propaganda activities and a renewal of disputes seems very  likely unless some agreement is reached.  It might also be desirable to indicate the lines on which the combined S.O.E. should co-operate with Combined Operations.  It requires no prophet to foresee almost as many diffi culties with the State Department as S.O.E. has had with the  P.0. Some plans for a joint front towards these all-powerful Departments should be discussed. It will probably be necessary to treat different countries in different ways. For example the British S.O.E. might wish to conduct certain activities in .Occupied Prance. The State Department very jealous of its influence might object. Should the discussion be carried on with the State Department through British S.O.E. via the P.0 or through the S.O.E. liaison direct with Washington A similar state of affairs might occur in Turkey should the American S.O.E. wish to become active in 'Turkey against the wishes of our P.0. and the best method of procedure might be either the same or the reverse. Russia Perhaps a great opportunity is given at last to start real co-operation. The possibilities of communism in subversive warfare are obvious. It might appear that the British would find it less difficult to make use of them than the Americans. On the other hand something really might be accomplished by the direct approach between the President and Stalin. A comprehensive and general cnarter shovild be prepared and the President might be persuaded to put it across to Stalin and get it agreed.  Security This cannot be stressed too much in our con versations. If we are going to let Americans into our organisation everywhere we are running a very grave danger. No American is really security minded. We should be between the devil and the deep sea. Either they will have to be told all -which seems inevitable -in which case we run great risks of the business being blown or they will have to be only partly informed in which case sooner or later they will evolve grievances. This aspect should be thoroughly ventilated with G.50 000., ii Notes on Collaboration between British and United States S.O.E.  OBJECT  1. The object of these notes is to lay down the principles on which such collaboration must be based the reasons behind these principles and the machinery by which they might be effected. PRINCIPLES  2. COOPERATION AT H.Q. LONDON/WASHINGTON. This is dependent on close liaison resulting in a common policy and is essential if we are to avoid crossing lines either in policy or In the supply of materials.  This liaison could be effected by a British liaison section working alongside Colonel Donovan s headquarters in Washington and a similar American liaison section working along side S.O.E. headquarters London. The duties of this liaison section would be   a To represent the views of their respective headquarters on all policy matters so that a common policy for every theatre can be decided on.  b To discuss with the H.Q. to which they have been accredited cases of dispute in the field which have been referred to that H.Q.  c To exchange Information and to keep their head quarters fully Informed of matters of interest.  d To coordinate the production demand and supply of equipment from British and U.S. sources.  e To exchange both operational and technical intelli gence and information on methods of training. Such a liaison section might consist of one head liaison officer who would be a high level representative charged with executive functions supported by requisit staff.  3. COOPERATION IN THE FIELD. It is essential to avoid the situation where there will be two completely independent organisations working in the field with all the consequent dangers of crossing of lines competition for agents and material etc. and inviting attempts by foreign governments or groups with whom both organisations would be dealing to play one off against the other.  In some cases the problem could be dealt with by assigning the given region exclusively either to the American or British organisation the organisation which agrees to stay out being represented at the most only by a liaison officer., 2  There will however he very few of these simple cases and in most areas the position will be that whilst an area is predominantly a British or American sphere of influence both countries will have some interests inside it and will need to establish some sort of representation and possibly a system of agents.  It is suggested that the general principles to be adopted in such cases should be   a Each area should be defined as being either a British or American area.  b Inside a British area it will be agreed that the control and direction should be British and that the policy should be laid down and all instructions to the Mission or Missions in that area should be issued from London. In an American area the same procedure would apply as regards Washington.  c In the field in a British area there would be a British Mission the head of which would be controller for the whole area and who would look for his direction and instructions to London. There could if the Americans so wished in the same territory be an American Mission which would have its own head quarters its own stations and its own agents butthe American Mission and its head at those headquarters would work under the direction and control of the British controller. The head of the American Mission could report direct to Washington on any matter he wished with a copy to the American liaison mission in London but he would receive his instructions from London and through the British controller and would only act on communications received direct from Washington with the agreement and consent of the British controller. In an American territory the same princi ple would apply with the roles reversed.  d In the event of a difference of opinion arising between the British or American controller and the head of the British or American Mission inside his territory which could not be settled locally the issue would be re ferred to London or Washington respectively and it v ould be the resporblbility of the headquarters in  question to settle it with the liaison mission attached to it. Even these rather general principles may not be able to be applied strictly in all cases and it may be necessary to make exceptions in certain countries to meet special requirements.     DETAILED REGOMMENDaTIOlMS.  4. IvIeddie east including the Balkans. It is recommended that this should be declared a British sphere of influence and that the principles outlined in para graph 3. above should be applied.  Thus it would be in order for the American S.O.E. to set up a mission in Cairo which in turn might have its own rep resentation and its own agents in the field in other stations such as Istanbul Tehran Baghdad etc. but this American, 3  machine would only be operated under the direction and control of the British controller. In effect the position would be that the British controller would have under him two organisat ions one British in its personnel the other American. He would exercise control in accordance with the present arrange ments namely he would himself look for direction to London  to the Minister of State for policy in those countries included in the latter's charter and to the C.-in-C in military matters. He would represent both units of his organisation on the S.O.E.  Committee.  5. INDIA. It is recommended that this should be declared exclusively a British sphere of influence and that all S.O.E. work would be carried out by the British S.O.E. without any American S.O.E. being established. If thought necessary however by G.50 000 an American liaison officer could be attached to the British organisation in order to facilitate transit of American personnel and material through India for China.  6. EAST AFRICA & MADAGASCAR It is recommended that this should be declared a British sphere of influence. G.50 000 may not wish to estatUsh more than a liaison mission in this area but should he wish to set up an American organisation this should be done in accordance with the principles outlined in paragraph 3. above and illustrated in the case of the Middle East.  7. 1EST AFRICA. Frawest. It Is recommended that this should be declared a British sphere of influence and that if an American mission is set up it should work in accordancd with the principles outlined in paragraph 3. x  The appointment of a Minister Resident for West Africa renders the position there almost entirely analogous to that in the Middle East and the same procedure should therefore be adopted as in the case of Cairo the head of the S.O.E. organi sation representing both the organisations under his control on the Minister's War Council.  I  WEST AFRICA. Neucols.  It is recommended that the same procedure should be adopted as in regard to West Africa Frawest.  S. ATLANTIC ISLANDS. It is recommended that these should be an American sphere of influence. It Is probable that the British S.O.E. would not wish to establish more than a liaison officer in any of the islands but if they wished to establish a mission it must work according to the principles laid down in paragraph 3.  9. CHINA. It is recommended that this should be declared an Americansphere of influence andthatassoonastheAmericanS.O.E. has the necessary personnel installed at Chungking and particu larly a head of Mission of the necessary standing the principles outlined in paragraph 3. should be applied. This would involve, 4  a reduction of the present staff of the British S.O.E. in China and the British organisation would thenceforth work under the direction and control of the head of the American Mission.  10. AUSTRALIA. No S.O.E. mission exists in Australia hut certain  S.O.E. representatives have been loaned to set up an independent Australian organisation with the title of I.S.D. At present this mission corresponds direct with S.O.E.London on technical and other matters but it is controlled by the supreme C.-in-C. South-West Pacific. Since this theatre has an American C.-in-C. it is recommened that it should be considered as a U.S. sphere of influence and that Colonel Donovan should make his own arrangements for cooperation direct with I.S.D. and the supreme C.-in-C.  It is essential however that there should be the closest cooperation between the Australian organisation aid the S.O.E. mission in India. ' 'his is especially necessary as regards operations into the Dutch East Indies.  Such cooperation between the two missions might be effected by the provision of an American or Australian liaison officer In India and a British liaison officer in Australia or through Dutch channels.  11. SOUTH AMERICA. As far as we can learn it is unlikely that G.50 000 s charter will be extended to cover South America. If this is confirmed by G.50 000 himself there will be no point in dis cussing with him the arrangements under which the British S.O.E. should work in this area.  If any American agency is appointed to deal with S.O.E. work in B0uth America we would be prepared to have this area declared an American sphere of influence and to collaborate with the American organisation in accordance with the principles laid down in paragraph 3.  If no American organisation is appointed to carry on  S.O.E. work in South America then we shall persist in our endeavours to have the British S.O.E. organisation working independently. 12 IBERIA AND NORTH AFRICA.  The British S.O.E. have an organisation covering North Africa based on Gibraltar. They have also got representation In Lisbon and Madrid but now carry out very few activities in Spain and Portugal. Moreover as far as Spain is concerned control of S.O.E. activity Is to all Intents and purposes in the hands of YN and the latter has not only a direct interest in Spanish Morocco including Tangier but has also an indiect Interest in the North African area generally. G.50 000 has a representative in Tangier with a small American staff with a high degree of mobility and fairly good contacts and a representa tive in Lisbon G.50 200 who is in charge of G.50 000's interests in Spain and Portugal is senior to and has authority over G.50 000's representative in Tangier and finally is, himself something of an expert on North Africa.  In view of the North African directive which has been received from the Chiefs of Staff it is of the utmost importance that there should be a single and tightly organised S.O.E. machine operating in North Africa receiving its direction and instructions from one headquarters only. There Is no absolute logical necessity for the Inclusion of the Iberian peninsula with North Africa in the same area but such an inclusion is for practical purposes rendered necessary as a result of the personal position of YN and G.50 200.  If Spain is handled separately from North Africa the man in charge of the North African Mission will sooner or later get at cross purposes with YN. Similarly G.50 200 is stationed as Assistant Military Attache at Lisbon but it would be ex tremely difficult to insist that he should have nothing to do with North African affairs.  here is one person under whom it should be possible to operate a single mission covering the Iberian peninsula and North Africa and that is A/DW. fie maintains the best possible relations with YN and both G.50 200 and G.B.6000 would probably be ready to serve under him.  It is therefore recommended that the area covered by the Iberian peninsula and North Africa should be constituted as a single mission that is should at any rate for the present be regarded as a British sphere of Interest that it should be operated from London as headquarters and that A/DW should be placed in charge.  Every effort should be made to get G.50 000 to agree that the mission so constituted should work strictly in accordance with the principles elaborated in paragraph 3.  It must always be borne in Blind that should American operations In North Africa be projected the control could be transferred to Washington.  13. ENEMY AND ENEMY OCCUPIED TERRITORIES IN WEST AND CENTRAL EUROPE. It is recommended that we should endeavour to get G.50 000 to agree that this area should be regarded at any rate for the present as a British sphere of influence.  The application of the principles laid down In paragraph  3. would then imply that G.50 000 would come and set up a mission in London which would work in the area in question under the control and direction of the head of the British organisation dealing with these territories -namely M. In actual fact it is probable that the Americans will not want to set up an organisation of this kind as they will recognise that with some small exceptions it would be impossible for them to work into Western and Central Europe for many months to come.  We should therefore try and get them to agree that they should concentrate on the training of agents and making all other necessary preparations to provide adequate American personnel to accompany the American portion of the expeditionary force to France. Such agents would be recruited and partially, %  -6   trained in U.S.A. and then s ent to England for their training to be completed and for attachment to the appropriate American units. At the same time it is recognised that G.50 000 is virtually certain to insist upon sending representatives to Stockholm Vichy and Serne and these representatives are certain to get in touch in turn with local elements.  As regards Stockholm the ideal arrangement would be that the American representative shouh work under the general direction and control of our chief representative there. It is unlikely however that 0.50 000 could be got to agree to this. We should insist however at least on an arrangement by which 0.50 000 s representative should be handled exclusively by G.50 000's liaison mission in London i.e. he should communi cate only with them and should receive his instructions only from them and not direct from Washington. Moreover it should be agreed that the liaison mission in London should keep the British S.O.E. fully informed of all such reports and should agree instructions with them before they are despatched. It should moreover be agreed that 0.50 000 s representative should not work independently with resistance groups in Norway or Denmark.  As regards Vichy and Berne it is recommended that tie American representatives should not have any contacts with the British S.O.E. field forces in these areas but that they should be handled by the American liaison mission in London who would keep the British S.O.E. fully informed of their activities and agree policy instructions with them., Refi CD/2522  19.6.42. From CD In returning these documents the only point I have not taken up with G.50 000 is that of the Austria Action. I think this is rather too much a matter for detail for him and I suggest that AD/o takes it up with G.50 201 and G., Pfci'jwOiTi c . C tu I Circulate to  ' . 4 AD/Reg Heft CH/ 56   Srd June 194J.  Dear G.  May I ta e this opportunity of thanking you for nil you have done to facilitate our comrere&tions with G.60 000 anc to enhance the prestige of S 0 E. with the teerican euifterities.  I wish your stay could have been longer beeauro there re E&ny things which Keep crapping up and about which I feel your advice would be of value but you are needed over in the St. tes sore than here.  I believe that will be of greet strength to our organisation out there he has outstanding administrative ability end hi position with G.SOjGOO is I believe as good as that of auyboc in the organic tion this slue. I sb sending out with hie several first decs people -with a thorough knowledge of what we are doing here ana I suggest that ub soon as he gets into the saddle in Uev-fork a certain number of your people should corns over here for a refresher.  four people have' all done marreilmit work but I feel that both you ana will cose to the conclusion that not top infrequent refresher eouraes over here sill be eooc. for thea and lx worth the list md aoney.   X thinx se are quite clear m to how we propose to proceed in South Asaerlea. fee aust continue to buildJp on organisation and X hope that once e can persu ue SP to t&ke the plunge in one country v e Any be able to get free-er h aid all round i as quite sure aosever ttot e cannot let tin. tsaa down by etngnating in th. 1. part of the world the position is far too dangerous. Again thanking you for your help and wishing you fca . best of luck.  lours very sincerely, Notes on Collaboration between British  and United States S.O.E.  \  OBJECT  1. The object of these notes is to lay down on which such collaboration must be based the reasons behind these principles and the machinery by which they might be effected. PRINCIPLES  2. COOPERATION AT E.Q. LONDON/WASHINGTON This is dependent on close liaison resulting in a common policy and is essential If we are to avoid crossing lines either in policy or in the supply of materials.  This liaison could be effected by a British liaison section working alongside Colonel Donovan's headquarters in Washington and a similar American liaison section working along side S.O.E. headquarters London. The duties of this liaison section would bes    a To represent the views of their respective headquarters on all policy matters so that a common policy for every theatre can be decided on.   b To discuss with the headquarters to which they have been accredited cases of dispute in the field which have been referred to that headquarters.  c To exchange information and to keep their head quarters fully informed of matters of interest.  d To coordinate the production demand and supply of equipment from British and U.S. sources.  e To exchange both operational and technical intelli gence and Information on methods of training. Such a liaison section might consist of one head liaison officer who would be a high level representative charged with executive functions supported by requisite staff.  3. COOPERATION IN THE FIELD. It Is essential to avoid the situation where there will be two completely independent organisations working in the field with all the consequent dangers of crossing of lines competition for agents and material etc. and inviting attempts by foreign governments or groups with whom both organisations would be dealing to play one off against the other.  In some cases the problem could be dealt with by assigning the given region exclusively either to the American or British organisation the organisation which agrees to stay out being represented at the most only by a liaison officer and a small staff., -2-   There will however be very few of these simple cases md in most areas the position will be that whilst an area is predominantly a British or American sphere of influence both countries will have some interests inside it and v/ill need to establish some sort of representation and possibly a system of agents.  It is suggested that the general principles to be adopted in such cases should be   a Each area should be defined as being either a British or American area.  b Inside a British area it will be agreed that the control and direction should be British and that ' the policy should be laid down and all instructions to the Mission or Missions in that area should be issued from London. In an American area the same procedure would apply as regards Washington.  c In the field in a British area there would be a British Mission the head of which would be controller for the whole area and who would look for his direction and instructions to London. There could if the Americans so v/ished in the same territory be an American Mission which would have its own head quarters its own stations and its own agents but the American Mission and its head at those headquarters would work under the' direction and control of the British controller. The head of the American Mission could report direct to Washington on any matter he wished with a copy to the American liaison mission in London but he would receive his instructions from London and through the British controller aid would only act on communications received direct from Washington with the agreement and consent of the British controller. In an American territory the same princi ple would apply with the roles reversed.  d In the event of a difference of opinion arising between the British or American controller and the head of the British or American Mission inside his territory which could' ridt bo settled locally the issue would be re ferred to London or Washington respective and it would be the responsibility of the he-adquarters in question to settle it with the liaison mission attached to it. Even these rather general principles may not be able to be applied strictly in all c&seS 'and it may be necessary to make exceptions in certain countries to meet specI'al'-.requirements ., NO. 1. 17th June. 1942.  Record of Discussion regarding collaboration  between British and -American S.O.B.  We set out hereunder a draft record of conversations on the above subject which took place on Tuesday norning 16th June 1942 between Colonel Goodfellow Colonel Garland Williams and Colonel Taylor and hr. Keswick and further conversations which took place in the evening of the 16th June between Colonel Goodfellow Colonel Taylor and Hr. Keswick.  The object of these discussions was to review the position in all areas throughout the world where collaboration between the British and American S.O.Es was possible with a view to determining how the principles set out in the paper headed Notes on collaboration between British and United States S.O.E . handed by Sir Charles Karnbro to Colonel Donovan   Copy attached hereto should be applied to each area.  It .was understood that the conversations were purely exploratory in character and that any agreement of views reached between the parties would in no way bind their principals without specific confirmation. It was further agreed that the procedure should be that a record would be made'of the discussions and agreed between the parties and that subject to confirmation by principals further discussionswould then be held covering each area in detail at which the appropriate Directors of the British .S.O.E. would attend with a view to working out agreements for each area in the most exact terms possible.  The various areas were reviewed in the following order and the following conclusions were arrived at  1. INDIA It was agreed that India -should be regarded as a British area where all operations would be carried out by the British mission with control being exercised from London. The American  C.O. would have the right to send out a liaison mission to be attached to the British mission for liaison purposes but not for operational purposes. 2. CHINA It was agreed that this area of which the headquarters. would bo at Chungking and which cover the whole of China including Japanese occupied China Manchuria and Korea should be regarded as an American sphere of influence. The American Mission would be established at Chungking and would direct all  S.O. activities in this area. It would be controlled from Washington. The existing British Mission at Chungking would he reduced and would be turned into a liaison mission attached to the American Mission. Tho British liaison mission in, 2  addition to its liaison duties would render any assistance which it could to the American mission but only at tho latter's request and under the latter's control  3. 'AUSTRALIA It was agreed that British S.O.L would have no responsibility for and would take no action in the area covered by General MacArthur's Command and that of the American Naval Command in the South Western Pacific This area would be considered as covering New Guinea and the Islands of the East Indian archipelago up to and inoluding Java and Borneo. It would be for the American S.O. to make its' own arrangements with the I.3.D. which already exists in Australia under General MacArthur s control. British S.O.E. would continue to give any assistance asked for to this.Mission.  4. It was 'agreed that Burma Siam Indo-China Malaya and Sumatra should be regarded as a no-man's land which could be worked into as convenient by the British S.O.E. Mission in India the American S.O. Mission in China and I.S.D in Australia. Line crossing inside this area would have to be avoided by close liaison between these three missions.  5. EAST AFRICA It was agreed that the area covered by the British S.O.E. Mission which already exists with Its headquarters at Durban charged with working Into Madagascar and Portuguese East Africa should be regarded as a British area American 0. would have the right to have a liaison mission attached to the British Mission at Durban.  6. WEST AFRICA -Frawest L Neucols Whilst it was agreed that the area covered b -these two existing British S.O.E. missions -namely the West African colonies from the southern boundary of Morocco to the boundary of South West Africa with Portuguese West Africa should be for the time being regarded as predominantly a Britishsphere it was recognised that tho American S.O. had a very definite interest in this area since if any military action on a large scale were to be undertaken by the United Nations in West Africa such action would predominantly be the responsibility of the American Military Authorities The American S.O. therefore consider that they must place themselves in a position to be able to carry out S.O.E. services for the American Command if such a situation should arise. The following procedure was accordingly agreed upon -   American S.O. would establish Missions corresponding to our Prawest and Neucols Missions. The programme of these American Missions would be worked out in as much detail as possible between Washington and London. Copies of this agreed programme would then be sent to the Heads-of the American Missions and the Hoads of the British Missions with clear instructions in both cases that the execution of this programme by the American Missions would be discussed step by step with the Heads of tho British Missions and no action taken until agreement had been, -3   reached with them. If such agreement could not be arrived a t the point at issue would be referred to headquarters to be settled between London and Washington and until decision was given no action would be taken by the American 1'Iissions. It was contemplated that the programme which would be worked out between London and Washington for these American Missions would be essentially preparatory in character consisting of the placing of American representatives at appropriate points v tho establishment of dumps of materials collection of information and operational intelligence and the working out of plans against  appropriate targets.  7. ATLLiTTIC ISLAUDS It was agreed that these Islands comprising the Azores Madeira the Canaries and the Cape Verde Islands should bo regarded as an American sphere and operated by an American Mission controlled from Washington The British S.G.E. would have the right to attach liaison officers to the American organisation.  8. BALKAN AMD THE MIDDLE EAST It was agreed that In view of the fact that all Military Commands iti this area were British Commands that the principal political authority was the British Minister of State at Cairo and that the whole of the territory other than Turkey within which and from which operations could take place or be based was wholly or partially under British Military occupation the areaat.present covered by the British S.O.E. with its head quarters at Cairo should be regarded as predominantly a British area. At the sa me time it was appreciated that there were many ways in which the American S.O. could be of groat assistance in this area. It could call upon-resourcos in regard to equip ment materials and possibly personnel which were not available to the British S.O.E. and in certain areas for example Turkey and Irafi American personnel could in somo respects operate more easily than British personnel.  The British representatives stressed the extreme com plexity of the situation with partia-ular regard to the fact that S.O.E. have to work in this area with a number of Allied Governments and foreign freedom movements or resistance groups and emphasised the delicacy of the political situation in various occupied or semi-occupied countries and the necessity of any  S.O.E. organisation conforming to tho policy of the local authorities such as the Minister of State tho local Military Commanders & the local Diplomatic representatives. They were accordingly of tho opinion that if line crossing confusion and friction with local authorities was to be avoided it was especially essential in this area that there should be unity of control in the field and unity of direction from a single headquarters. They accordingly suggested that the set-up should be as follows - The controller of the existing British S.O.E. Mission would be regarded as being in charge of all S.O.E. operations in that area and would be responsible for all S.O.E. activity to the local authorities particularly the S.O.E. Sub-Committee of the Minister of State's War Council and to headquarters in London An American S.O. Mission should be set up in Cairo with the object of providing such assistance as it could to the British  S.O.E. and of contributing to the British S.O.E . services which would only be available from tho American side. The form and extent of tho organisation of the American Mission and also tho, scope and character of its activities would bo discussed and settled by the Head of the American Mission with the British Controller under whom he would be working. In the event of failure to reach agreement the issue would be referred to Headquarters to bo settled between London and V/ashington and in the meantime the .views of the Controller would prevail. The Hoad of the American Mission would communicate direct with Washington on any matter ho pleased but it would be clearly laid down that as regards any action the American Mission would look to the Controller for direction and instructions .and would take no action except with his approval.  The substantial effect of this arrangement would be that there would bo a single S.O.E. machine in the area at the head of which would be the present Controller but that under him there would be two organisations namely the existing British .0.E. organisation covering the whole area of the Mission and a small American organisation which would be fitted by the Controller into the general programme wherever it could help.  9 WESTSR1I EUROPE  % It was agreed that collaboration between the British and American S.O.Es in the V/cstern European area which should be understood as covering Scandinavia and the Baltic area the Low Countries Franee Switzerland Germany Italy Poland and Czechoslovakia would have to be arranged in two stages.  On the British side it was appreciated that as there will a t some future date' be a very large American force based on Great Britain with the task of carrying on military operations in Eastern Europe there must eventually be a complete American S.O attached to this American Command to carry out S.0 E scr.vices for it in those areas in Western Europe which have been allocated to American forces. Once those areas were known it would bo easy to apply the principle that all 5 0.E. activities vii thin the area allocated to the American Command would be carried on by the American S.O. the latter taking over from B ritish 3.O.E. any field organisation whi ch the British S.O.E. might in the meantime have established in territories eventually placed under American Command.  It was recognised firstly that this division of military force was still some way off secondly that it would be some months before the American S.O. would be in a position to operate a s an independent organisation attached to the American Command and thirdly that not only would some interim arrangement have to be come to regarding activities by the American S.O. in Western Europe pending the drawing of the lines of demarcation but oven when the areas of the British and American Commands had been determined there would remain countries unaffected by. those invasion plans in which both the British and the American S.O.Es might wish to operate. To cover the interim period referred to above before any area could bo allocated to the American S.O. as their exclusive territory it was suggested that the following procedure should be adopted An American Mission would be set up-in London with two main functions. The first'would bo the preparation of an Amo'rican  S.O. organisation for attachment to the American Military Command This would bo largely a matter between the American S.O. Mission and the American Command in Great Britain and the British S.O.S. would only bo involved to tho extent to which, it could give assistance p articularly in matters of training to its American counterpart. The second function would be the setting up of at least embryonic American field forces in the countries likely to bo effected by the re-invasion of Europe namely Norway the Low Countries and Prance. The American representatives felt that it would be impossible for' them to refrain from taking action at all in the way of infil tration or recruitment of agents until the American sphere of ' military operations was decided. At the same time they recog nised that since the British S.O.E. had organised and were operating field forces in all these areas to a very considerable extent already it would be inviting trouble for then to commence building up an independent American field force which would very likely cross lines with existing machinery. It was accordingly  agreed that during the interim period the American Mission would establish and operate agents in the field only in collabo ration and under the general direction of the British S.O.E. headquarters. Thus agents would only be infiltrated from this country with the knowledge and approval of the British S.O.E. headquarters. Agents recruited locally by an American rep resentative such as the representative at Vichy would be notified to the British headquarters and would be sent instruct ions only with their knowledge and approval. All American agents in the field in the area in question would be operated by the American S.O.E. Mission in London and not from Washington  As regards those countries which would not be effected by any division of military force between the British and American Commands e.g. Germany Switzerland Italy Poland and Czechoslovakia it is suggested by the British S.O.E that spedial regional arrangements should bo worked out in each case providing either for the exclusive allocation of areas to one or the other organisation or for the exact machinery of collaboration required to ensure that the two organisations did not cross lines. It is for instance obvious that the Poles and the Czechs should not be encouraged to play the British and American S.O.E off against each other.  1. NORTH AFRICA L THE IBEBINA PENINSULA  As the ideas put forward by tho British and American representatives regarding collaboration in these areas were completely at variance and it was consequently felt that they should refer tho proposals to their principals the discussions on this subject are dealt with in a separate paper attached hereto as Appendix 1, APPENDIX 1.  North Africa c.nd Iberian Peninsula.  The British 5.O.E. representatives suggested that North Africa should bo regarded at least for the present as a territory which should be operated from London and they out lined an arrangement by which a combined British-American organisation would be operated under a British S.O.E. officer with headquarters at Gibraltar. The factors which the British  S.O.E. had principally in mind in making this suggestion were that  a Gibraltar is the natural base for S.O.E. operations in North Africa It would bo the point at which all stores would have to be assembled for distribution in North Africa.and It is the site of the S.O.E. W/T Station which would eventually operate all agents W/Ts In North Africa and would provide the main line channel to London in the event of other lines failing. As an S.O.E. headquarters at Gibraltar would be dealing with British authorities in that fortress such dealings would bo facilitated if a British S.O.E. officer wera in charge.  b At the present stage London is pferhaps a better operational headquarters for dealing m th North Africa than Washington from the point of view of distanco and facilitios for tho consultation of interested pa rties.  c It is desirable that Madrid which has a direct interest In the North African picture through Spanish Morocco and an indirect interest in the French North African situation should be kept in step. As the dominating factor in Madrid as regards S.O.E. work is the British Naval Attache there 'would be certain advantages in having a man in charge at Gibraltar who had close relations with him.  d British S.O.E. wore prepared to supply their best available man in the person of Colonel Clarke who had boon dealing with this area for a long time who would be persona grata at Gibraltar Tangier and Madrid and who enjoys special relations with the British Naval Attache in Madrid and with the American S.O. sta ff In Lisbon and North Africa. British S.O.E. suggested that if their ideas were accept able to their American colleagues they would propose that the whole area of the Iberian Pcninsulp and North Africa should be grouped together as a single mission to be operated under the control of London. The exact relationship of American to British personnel at Lisbon Gibraltar and Tangier would have to be worked out in the course of further discussion the guiding principle being the necessity for a certain minimum degree of unity of control in tho field and direction from a single headquarters.  The American representatives expressed the view that the North African area should be. regarded as a predominantly American sphere in which a combined American and British organisation would operate under the control of Washington. The main factors, which they had in mind in making this proposal were that  1  a Any approaches to French authoritios in North Africa would almost certainly have to bo mado through American channels.  b Any military operations which it might bo decided to carry out in North Africa would almost certainly bo the responsibility of the United States authorities and the command would be American.  c All discusssions with French authorities in North Africa were intimately bound up with the economic policy to be adopted towards North Africa by the United Nations. This was predominantly a matter for Washington's decision and it vms absolutely essential to co-ordinato any political-military negotiations in North Africa with the policy of the Bureau of Economic Warfare in Washington. This could obviously bo done most effectively if control ' of the S.O.E. organisation engaged in these negotiat ions was in Washington also. The American representatives therefore proposed that an Ancricari Mission should be sot up with headquarters at Gibraltar and they indicated that they would like to send a now and senior officer to bo head of this Mission. They thought that the Iberian Peninsula should bo separated from North Africa and that special arrangements should bo made for Anglo-American collaboration in that area., NO. 2. 19th June 1942.  Record of Discussion regarding collaboration betwoon British and American S.O.B.  We sot out hereunder a draft record of conversations which took place in the afternoon of Thursday June 18th 1942. There were present representing American S.O. Colonel Goodfellow and representing British S.O.E. Brigadier Gubbins Colonel Taylor Mr. Keswick and Captain Pleydell-Bouverle.  The object of the discussion was to review in more detail the position regarding collaboration between British and American S.O.Es in the Western and Central European area v/hich was covered in a general way by the discussions of the 16th June recorded in paragraph 9. of the Record of Discussions dated 17th June.  Brigadier Gubbins who had not been present at the pre vious discussions explained in more detail the activities of tho British S.O.E. in Western Europe and pointed out that some clarification and perhaps a certain modification of the conclusions reached at the previous mooting and sot down in paragraph 9. referred to above were required.  The discussion then ranged over a wide variety of problems and for gairposos of clarity it is proposed in this record to set down e summary of the conclusions reached in a more systematized way than would be possible if a merely historical record of the discussion were attempted. These conclusions in so far as they modify those reached at the previous meeting should be regarded as replacing the latter.  The division of the area in question for purposes of discussion into those countries likely to bo invaded by the Allied Forces and those not likely to be so immediately effected was again recognised as was also the fact that arrangements for collaboration covering the former territories would have to be treated in at least two phases. For purposes of con venience therefore tho summary of conclusions will follow this classification.  A. INVASION SPHERE.. This sphere covers Norway Holland Belgium and France. Arrangements for collaboration would have to go through at least two phases of which only tho first could be discussed in de tail at tho present time. This first phase would bo one in which the British S.O.E. would continue very much as it is at present working both on the development and operation of a field force of agents in each of tho countries concerned and on the building up of anS.Q.E liaison organisation for attach ment to tho appropriate Military Commands to accompany them to tho Continent whilst the American S.O. concentrated on preparatory work at the same time giving such assistance as, they could to the British S.O.h. In its task of operating the field force abroad. 'Phis phase would end as soon as tho stage was reached when the question arose of a S.O.B. liaison organisation attached to an American Command taking over the actual operation of a field force abroad.  1. FIRST PHASE.  Q- Organisation in the Field .  It was agreed that it was essential that tho field force in each of the four countries concerned should con tinue to be treated as one whole the object being to create throughout the area likely to be invaded by Allied Forces a single united nations fifth column organisation to be at tho disposal of the Allied invading force whether American or British. This would mean in practice that the American S.O. Mission in England would not with tho exception of tho case referred to at the end of this para graph put agents of their own into these countries who would function separately from tho existing field force and who would .be opera ted separately hy thorn from London. If agent personnel was available from American sources it would bo .treated .exactly-like -agent personnel available' from other sources and infiltrated by the existing head quarter organisation into the appropriate country to work as part of the one existing field force there. In effect during this first phase there would bo no change in the character or mo-thod of operation of the field force abroad tho American S.O. simply contributing such assistance as   they could in regard to personnel equipment facilities intelligence -otc . The typo of assistance particularly envisaged by the British S.O.E. representatives was passports air transport and assistance regarding dollar transactions.  The exception referred to above is tho case of American   representation at Vichy. It was -appreciated that as long as tho United States retain diplomatic relations to tho Vichy Government it was possible for the American S.0. to have an organisation based on their diplomatic mission insider Vichy Franco and in fact they havo made all arrange ments to establish such representation. It was further recognised that American S.O. representatives in Vichy would inevitably make contacts and crcato though perhaps hot on a largo scale a system of agents. It was agreed that such a field force should not as far as could -at present be seen have any direct connection with the normal S.O.E field force in Franco. At tho same-time to avoid confusion it was agreed that  i this Vichy organisation would bo operated by the American Mission in London and not by Washington direct and  ii that tho S.O. Mission in London would operate in closest collaboration and in accord with the general direction of tho British S.O.E. French Region.  b Liaison Organisation. It was agreed that the American S.O would concentrate primarily upon the recruitment and training of liaison staff which would eventually be attached to tho American Commands in order to provide for the latter S.O. services in the, areas in which they 'would ho operating. It was envisaged that the American 5.0 would recruit this personnel in the United Sates give thorn preliminary training there and then send them to England for further training. Such recruit ment and training would of course bo the responsibility of the American S.O. but the Eritish S.O.E. would place all training facilities in England at their disposal. The American S.O would of course only require to recruit liaison personnel for attachment to American Commands with qualifications for operating in those countries which would be invaded by American forces. It was considered probable that a sufficiently definite indication of those countries could be obtained at an early date. As soon as such indication had been given the British S.O.E. 'would cease to recruit and train liaison Personnel for those countries which had been allocated to American Commands.  At least a certain proportion of the American S.O. liaison personnel would have to be given as part of their1 training an intimate knowledge of the field organisation with which they would eventually have to work and this could only bo done by training them in the country sections concernod at British S.O.E. headquarters.  2. SECOiJD PHASE. This phase would commence as indicated above when not only had there been a definite allocation between British and American forces but when also the American S.O. liaison personnel for attachment to American Commands had boon more or less completely organised and the question arose as to whether they ought not to take over the opera.tion of tho field force in the areas in which they were going to function. It was agreed that it would be impossible at this stage to la y .down arrangements to cover this contingency since so much would depend upon factors which are at present unknown o.g. the actual allocation of tho Commands tho imminence of the invasion itself etc. Thus if Nofway were allocated to the United States forces it would be comparatively simple once they had reached the necessary stage of development for the American S.O. liaison organisation attached to the American Command for this area to take over tho operation of tho field force In Norway absorbing for that purpose as much as was necessary of the country section which had hitherto been running it. On the other hand it would almost certainly be impracticable to split up the control of tho field organisation in the area comprising the Low Countries and Franco since not only would tho field force in Franco form a whole which could not be divid&cfe between two separately oontnolling headquarters in London but also the activities of tho field force through out this area once the invasion had started would be of more or loss equal importance to all parts of tho Allied lino except in the areas immediately behind the actual fighting For example sabotage activities in the area of Liege or of Luxembourg or of Chalons could bo equally useful to British forces fighting in the Low Countries and North Eastern France or American forces fighting in the region of Rouen or Amiens. A good deal will obviously depend upon the form of military command eventually established and It might well be found that if the supreme command headquarters for the whole area was established in England the concentration of the whole 5.0. headquarters with that command would bo the best solution. It was accordingly, 4  agreed tliat the way in which the control of the field  force which during the first phase would be concentrated  in the British S.O.E. headquarters should be allocated  between the British and American organisations and would  have to be worked out gradually as the situation clarified -   B. NON-1iWAS10N SPHERE This sphere covers such countries as Germany Italy Switzerland Poland Czechoslovakia and Sweden. The conclusions reached regarding the nay.in which collaboration should be effected in these areas can be conveniently set out under the three following headings  Poland and Czechoslovakia.  In regard to these two -countries the secret armies andother underground resistance organisations arc operated by the Governments of the countries concerned the role of S. O.E.. whether British or American will continue to bo essentially that of providing then .with allpossible assistance. It was recog nised that the British S.O.E. have already been 'working-for a considerable time on the job of assisting Polos and Czechs and coordinating their activities with the strategic policy laid...- down by the Chiefs of Staff Committee and that at any rate for some time to come the role of the American Mission would only bo that of providing assistance which they could make available more easily that the British.  It was agreed that in order to avoid line crossing   a all dealings with the Polos and Czechs in regard to S. Q E . activities would bo carried out by the American Mission in London and not by Washington direct and  b that whether as a result of an approach by the Poles or Czechs or on their own initiative the Amoricah S 0 . Mission in London would not make any arrange ments for the giving of assistance to these Allies without first consulting the British S..O.E. and concerting the measures proposed with them. Germany and Italy.  It was a'greed that at any rate at the present stage there was no need to insist upon a single S.O.E. field force in these two countries and that there would probably bo room for a long time to come for separate British and American organisations working in these areas. At .the/.some time it was' recognised as obviously essential if lino crossing were to be avoided that there trust be some 'clearing house' for the operations of the two organisations. It was agreed   a as far as American S.O. was concerned Germany and Italy would be operated by the S.O.E. Mission .in London and not by Washington direct  b that the American S.O. Mission and the British S.O.E. headquarters should work in the strictest collaboration in regard to these two countries keeping each other fully advised as to progress and policy and that-they should endeavour as far as possible to allocate exclusively to one or the other the various contacts and channeIs avallablo., 5  Sweden and Switzerland.  \ Special problem arise in connection with those two countries since they represent bases from which work can bo carried on into several areas.   a Sweden It was recognised that the American S.O. would wish to establish representation in Stockholm. It was pointed out by the British representatives that their present Mission in Stockholm was engaged on four separate functions nariely work into Norway work into Denmark where we work for S.I.S. as well as for ourselves and preparations for post-occupational work in Sweden itself and work into Germany. It was pointed out that whilst v/ith v/ork Into Germany the general principle laid down in paragraph 2. above could have been easily applied and would have involved no very close connection between tho American S.O. represonta tive in Stockholm and the British S.O.E. Mission there work into Norway Denmark and Sweden itself was a much more delicate business. As regards Norway it was clear that ' activities in this country must be governed by the arrange ments for invasion countries sot out in section A. dcove and that it would bo impossible for the American S.O. representative in Stockholm to operato any field force In Norway.  As regards tho other throe countries it was agreed that he should work in the closest possible collaboration and in accordance v/ith the general direction of the head of the British  S.O.E. Mission in Stockholm.  b Switzerland. Switzerland is a base for v/ork into Germany Italy and France. It was felt however that unlike Stockholm It would probably be sufficient it It v/ere agreed that any American G.O. representative in Switzerland should be operated by the American S.O. Mission in London and not by Washington direct and that the American S.O. Mission in London should in this connection work in the strictest collaboration with tho British S.O.E. headquarters each kooping the other fully advised with regard to progress and policy and that they should endeavour to allocate as far as possible exclusively to one or the other the various contacts and channels available  With London thus being usod as a 'clearing house' it was felt that it would riot be necessary or pbrhaps not even advisable for the local representatives in Switzerland to have any connection v/ith each other., NO 3. 22nd Juno 1942  Record of Discussion ro s-rding collaboration between British and American S.O.E.  We set out hereunder a draft record of conversations which took place in the evening of Friday June 19th 1942 at which were present Colonel Ooodfcllow representing American  S.O. and Colonel Taylor Lord Olonconner Mr. Keswick and Captain Pleydcll-Bouvorie representing British S.O.L. The object of the discussion was to follow up earlier conversations as recorded in Record No. 1 of the 17th J'uno particularly paragraph .8 and to review the position in thaj area in more detail. The following summarises the con clusions reached  1. BALKANS AND MID EAST It was agreed that paragraph 8 of the record of the previous meeting constituted a fair record.  It was agreed in general that the form and extent of the American Mission and the activities which it might undertake should bo discussed between the British Head of  S.O.E. Mid East and a representative of the American S.O. and that their recommendations should bo referred to London and Washington for ratification. Regarding the reference in the earlier record to direct communication between Washington and the Hoad of the American Mission in Cairo it was agreed that all such telegrams whether originating from Washington or.Cairo should be repeated to the American Mission attached to S.O.E. London. It was also agreed that it would bo the responsibility of the . American Mission in London to keep British S.O.E. informed as to the content of all such messages which affect British interests. It was agreed that if the American Mission set up their own War Station in Cairo this would be used only for communications with Washington as the War Station belonging to S.O.E. Mid East is already adequate for handling all communications with agents in the field.  A discussion ensued regarding supplies of equipment from America to S.O.E. Mid East. It wa s pointed out that such equip ment comes under two categories namely   a Service Equipment including aircraft naval craft arms' ammunition medical stores building materials transport parachutes. containers clothing field telephones .and  b Non-Service Specialised Equipment including explosives sabotage devices W/T sots War Station and Broadcasting equipment etc. With regard to the former it was pointed out that S.O.E. is the British Government Department created for waging subversive warfare but that C.-in-C Mid'East is responsible for all operations, in that theatre of war. S.O.E. plans must therefore conform to C.-in-C's operational requirements and to the strategic requirements'of'the Chiefs of Staff They are therefore sub mitted to C.-in-G for his concurrence and in carrying thorn out  S.O.E. aro acting as his agents. It follows that all requests for equipment in this category must originate from S.O.E. Mid East who must look to C.-in-C Mid East in the first place for the facilities and stores required for operations which he has approved. If however ho is unable to supply S.O.E. Mid East advise S.O.E. London and if they cannot be obtained in the United Kingdom S.O.E. London must apply through the appropriate Ministry and Munition Assignment Boards to Washington. And it is at this stage that support from Colonel Donovan for such applications will be of the greatest value.  It was remarked that this-machinery has been sot up to enable the combined Chiefs of Staff to pool the resources of the United States and Great Britain and allocate them to the various theatres of war having regard also to transport facili ties  It was agreed that it will therefore be impossible for  S.O.E. Mid East to make direct application to the American S 0. for equipment of this typo. It was considered however that if the-American S.O. can become possessed of aircraft seacraft etc. it might be possible for them to send then to their own Mission in the Middle East and. place them at the disposal of the British S.O.E. organisation. In doing this howovor it would be necessary for the American S.O. to send their own crews and spares etc. so that the aircraft could be serviced as an independent unit and it is clear that.even this plan would involve negotiations with the military authorities in Egypt. Nevertheless it was agreed that S.O.E. London should make up a list of equipment in this category of which they stand in need and supply it to tho American S.O Regarding Non-Service Equipment it was pointed out that tho British S.O.E. aro themselves manufacturing all their own special devicos and W/T.sets. At the same tine it was agreed that there was a shortage of certain types of W/T sets and broadcasting equipment.  Accordingly it was agreed that S.O.E. London should make up a list of their requirements under this heading and supply it to the toerlean S.O. And it was agreed''that so far as this equipment was concerned there could be no objection to tho American S.O. either   a despatching it to thoir American Mission in the Mid East or '  b supplying it direct to S.O.E. Mid East. Regarding personnel it was explained that there is believed to bo a shorta go of W/T operators in the Middle East and that it v/ould be useful if say 10 trained W/T operators could bo attached to tho American Mission for work in the S.O.E. Mid East War Station'near Cairo. It was also pointed out that S.O.E. Mid East to-day recruits tho'raajority of its' Greek and Jugoslav personnel from thoir respective armies and that it was desirable to obtain nationals of these two countries and of Bulgaria Roumania and Hungary from other quarters. Such personnel should be trained as W/T operators and oes export organisers for, infiltration into occupied countries whore they can assist friendly elements to organise passive resistance sabotage and revolt.  2'. NORTH AFRICA  The position regarding this area as set out in Record No. 1 paragraph. 10 and Appendix 1 was also discussed on tho same occasion but only tentatively. Sir Charles Haribro dis cussed it again with Colonel Goodfollow on tho 21st Juno and in accordance with these discussions a draft proposal as sot out hereunder was drawn up for submission by the British S.O.E to their Chiefs of Staff and by the American S.O.E. to their authorities.  ''Since a compromise must be found tho following suggestion is put forward   1 North Africa including Spanish Morocco to be regarded as predominantly an American sphere of influence.  2 The American S.O. to establish the Mission for North Africa the head of which would bo responsible for S.O.E. activities in that area. The existing British organisation would continue and its personnel would remain administratively and operationally rosponsiblo  to a British hoad but the latter would .operate under the general direction and control of the American head of the Mission nahiidnery will bo set ut to this end.  h   3 General policy would bo agreed between Washington and London and instructions would be issued by Washington to the American Head of tho Mission a copy of any such agreed instructions would be sent from London to the II ead of the British organisation.  4 Gibraltar as an S.O.E. base from which supplies of arms and equipment transport facilities and W/T facilities are made available would remain outside the arqa. of t he North African Mission and under tho control of the Hoad of tho British S.O.E-. Organisation.  5 In order to ensure tho closest co-operation and liaison between the Mission and the local British Civil and Military authoritios machinery will be set up which will enable the Governor and C.-in-C Gibraltar and tho British Consiil General Tangier to exercise the necessary supervision and co-ordination 3. SPAIN AND PORTUGAL. In view of the fact that S.O.E. activities In Portugal  other than the use of Lisbon as a base for the creation of ' lines of communication into Franco have been practically re duced to nothing by the decision of th.. British Ambassador and the Foreign Office and of the fact that British activities in Spain arc to all intents and purposes directed and controlled by the British .Naval Attache in Madrid it was agreed that there was.no need to cone to a detailed agreement regarding collnbo ration between tho British and American S.O.Es in this territory in the course of tho present discussions. Such collaboration as was possible could bo worked out in duo course on the spot between tho present American S.O.E representative at Lisbon, 4  and Madrid or by his successor if ho were removed with the local British representatives.  It was indicated by the S.O.E representatives that it might be very convenient to have the American S.O. handle the few W/T contacts left to 'British S.O.E. in Portugal.  It was made clear that the section operating in Lisbon on lines of communication into Prance would not be included in any arrangements for collaboration In the Iberian Peninsula proper.  4. VJBST AFRICA With reference to paragraph 6 of the Record No. 1 of the 3.7th June it was explained by the British representatives that they had been asked by the Minister Resident Lord Swinton to make clear to him the relationship they expected would exist between him and any American Mission or Missions based on the territory within his charter and that they had confirmed to the Minister Resident that the situation would. In this as in other respects be analogous to that existing in Cairo and that the Head of the British Mission in West Africa would act as the link between any American Mission and the Minister Resident putting up to the latter the requirements of the American Mission and convoying the decisions of the Resident Minister to the American Mission  5 FINLAND  It was agreed that Finland should be regarded as an American sphere and that the British S.O.E. should place all facilities and contacts useful for this country at the dis posal of their American colleagues.  6. RUSSIA S.O.E. explained the position regarding their liaison mission In Moscow and their agreement with the N.K.V.D. that neither party would carry out reiy operations in the territory of the other except by mutual arrangement. It was agreed that as the American S.O. had no Intention for the present at least of dealing with Russia there was no need to work out any arrangements for collaboration for this area., NO. 4U 23rd Juno 1942.  Record of Discussion regarding collaboration between British and American S.O.E.  We set out hereunder a draft record of conversations which took place on Thursday 18th Juno 1942. There wore present Colonel Goodfollow representing American S.O. and Colonel Davies and Captain Pleydo11-Bouverio representing B ritish S.O.E.  The object of the discussion was to view the position regarding collaboration between British and American S.O.Es in connection with research development and production of equipment and devices.   . RESEARCH AND DEVELOPIIENT.  Colonel Goodfellow stated that Colonel Donovan had no research establishment nor did he intend to institute ono. They would place all their problems before the Scientific Advisory Council under the Chairmanship o f Dr. Conant.  Colonel Goodfcllow asked whether v/o had any requests as regards scientific research and he was informed that the  D.S.R. had supplied a list of items which night bo developed and it was thought as well to finish those before embarking on anything now. Colonel Goodfellow was informed that Major Freetth and Mr. Billinghurst were kept currently advised as to what we v/ore doing in this country and so far wo had had nothing in return. It would therefore be appreciated If this matter could bo taken up with Major Preoth as we were anxious to benefit by American research experience.  It was finally suggested that at an early opportunity representatives from the Radio and Dovioos Departments of Station IX should proceed to. America to discuss the kind of development which should bo proceeded with on both sides and so avoid duplication and over-lapping.  2. PRODUCTION Colonel Ooodfellow informed us that Mr Billinghurst and Major Preoth were now established in How York and were in fact managing his production programme f  Our conception of the relationship between S.O.E. and Colonel Donovan1 organisation in respect of supplies was then elaborated. It was suggested that there should be an interchange of production figtiros and that some kind of joint production planning should bo evolved. The modalities of this were not discussed in detail.  3. FINANCE Colonel Goodfcllow was informed that wo had cone to tho conclusion that it would be bettor to wipe out any kind of cash transaction between S.O.E. and Colonel Donovan's organisation and that each should supply the other with goods without charge and there would merely bo a sytom of recording types' and number of goods dolivorod., Colonel Goodfollow stated that ho had reckoned on cash transactions-and had in'-fact budgeted forward for the amount ho was likely to purchase from us but had not allowed for any goods we night obtain from him without'payment.  It was pointed out to him that if we indulged in cash transactions it would probably hold up supplies in view of the formalities which would have to bo undergone by loth sides as a result of the very complicated financial agreements between our respective countries.  It was suggested that Colonel Goodfellow should take the matter up with Colonel Donovan and that Colonel Davies should take it up with Sir Charles Hambro.  4. As a result of the above conversation a formula quoted hereunder was worked out between Colonel Davies and Y//Cdr. Vernier on behalf of S.O.E and submitted to Colonel Goodfollow and hr Atkins Finance Department of the War Office both of whom have indicated their agreement with it.   The Office of Strategic Services a nd the Special Operations Executive both produce ordnance which will be used in practically every case for similar operations if not in respect of joint operations.  Subject to S.O.E for its pfert having to obtain approval of interested Government deparbffiSjfitS' It is agreed that the foilwing is the best procedure to be adopted in the interests of 'both parties  Resources should be pooled wherever possible and machinery set up   a To determine jointly the types and quantities which each organisation should produce  b The allocation of such production to the various operational centres.  c As regards the question of finance such production it was agreed that each side should finance their own production and that whilst detailed records should be kept of thevdestinations of all issues there will be no payments or financial obligations a s between the two organisations or their respective Governments ., 1\T0. 5 25rd Juno 1042.  Record of Discussion regardIns collaboration between British and iimcrican S 0.B.  Vie sot out hereunder a draft record of conversations which took place on Monday 22nd June 1S42. There were present Colonel Goodfellow representing Rmorican S.O. and Ytf/Cdr. Vennor representing British S.O.E  The object of the'discussion was to view the position regarding finance.  At Colonel GoodfeHow s request W/Cdr. Vcnner gave a general outline of S.O.E. finance and stated that funds drawn from the British Treasury for S.O.E. expenditure were charged to the secret vote. While S.O.E. paid out of such funds the salaries of all officers the pay of Other Ranks was met from the open votes of the Service Departments. Stores and equipment other than those of a special or most secret nature were also supplied by the Service Departments without a charge falling on S.O.E. funds.  W/Cdr. Vonnor stated that a normal month s expenditure of S.O.E at the present time was about 550 000 covering operations throughout the world but that naturally in an organisation such as S.O.E the monthly expenditure was subject to much fluctuation dependent upon special projects and operations as they occurred and he informed Colonel Goodfollow that in thinking of such a figure in connection with S. 0/ . America he must bear in mind to what extent S.O. America would have to pay personnel and become liable to pay for stores &c. issued from Service sources.  Colonel Goodfollow stated that up to now S.O. America had been fina need from block grants from the President's secret fund but that now that it was becoming part of the Chiefs of Staff Department he was not 'certain what effect this would have in finance but he thought that grants v/ould be made from Army votes which would be in the nature of con fidential funds. He stated that all Army personnel. Officers included drew their pay from Service Departments.  A discussion then took place on tlje question of stores and equipment for use by the two S.O. organisations and W/Cdr. Vennor submitted a copy of the a ttachcd minute in regard thereto. Colonel Goodfellow expressed his agreement with the procedure outlined in this minute and took a copy with him stating that it would be most useful to him in making the corresponding arrangements whon he got back to America.  W/Cdr. Vennor then raised the question of Messrs. Proeth and Billinghurst s duties and Colonel Goodfellow stated that they wore acting in an advisory capacity and while they call for quotations and issue orders for materials Ac. from his office they had nothing to do with finance or accounting. W/Cdr. Venner stated that ho was glad to ha ve this confirmation since Messrs Preoth and Billinghurst were technical men and were not presumed to have the ability or responsibility of h andling financial and accounting matters., The Office of Strategic Services and the Special Operations1-Executive both produce ordnance which will be used in practically every cc.se for similar operations if not in respect of joint operations .  Subject to S-'.O.E. for its part having to obtain approval of interested Government departments it is agreed that the following is the best procedure to be adopted in the interests of both parties.  Hesources-should be pooled-wherever possible and machinery set up   a To determine jo.intly' the types and quantities which each organisation should produce  b The allocation of such production to the various operational centres. . c As regards the question of finance in respect of such production it was agreed that e ach side should finance their o wn production and that whilst detailed records should be kept of the destinations of all issues there will be no payments/ or financial obligations as between the two'organisations or their respective Governments, NO. 6. 25rd June 1942.  Record of Discussion regarding collaboration  . between British and -American S.O.E.  At their meeting of the 16th June the American represen tatives handed to the British representatives a memorandum on training which is quoted hereunder.  As then arranged this memorandum was passed to the British Directors concerned for their comments and these also are quoted hereunder. Prom these it will be seen' that as regards the ten out of the total of thirteen stations which are under the control of Brigadier Gubbins only a very sm all amendment to the proposals made by the American S.O. representatives is suggested whilst as regards the three stations which come under the control of Colonel Davies a somewhat different basis for collaboration than that implied in the original American memorandum is put forward.  TRAINING. American Memorandum   in the past three months several officers of the American S.O. organisation have been permitted to attend the British S.O.L. training school at Toronto Canada where the training was carried on along the lines of the Para- Military and Advanced Schools It is now considered extremely desirable that a la rge number of American Officers be permitted to attend the various specialized training schools in Great Britain and particularly is it considered essential that American S.O. Officers be detailed for short periods of time to the various operational stations and offices in England. This will hot only serve as a'means of training for the individuals concerned but will be a most powerful factor in insuring unity of doctrine and effort in the future operations of the two national S.O. organisations. To insure this object it is requested that the American S.O. bo permitted to send the following number of selected officers for approximately one month's training at the schools or stations mentioned.below  Establishment Number to be -Total number . sent'at one'time to'be'sent'  Para-Military School 1 3  Advanced Schools 1 3  Industrial Sabotage School 1 3  Propaganda School 1  3  3   Radio School 1  2   Radio operation Station 2  1   Parachute School 1  2   Camouflage Station 1  10   Station 9 2, -I  Establislmont Ntunboi' to bo Total number .. sent at one time  to bo sent'  Station 12 2 10 Sta tion 61 2 2 Country Sections 8 16 Naval Operational 2 6 BRIGADIEU GUB3INS 1 COI'ILSNTS .   With reference to the above quoted memorandum I consider that in some cases the number of /merican S.O Officers to bo attached any one time are excessive and I suggest that they should bo amended to read as follows  Radio Operation station -1  Station 61 -1  Country Sections -4  It is assumed that the Naval Operational Station referred to is the one at Dartmouth which operates under  C1. The question of the numbers who can be taken at this establishment at any one time .has not therefore been considered.  COLOREL DAVIES f COMMENTS  Research and Development  Colonel Goodfellow and Colonel Davies agreed that there should be cloao collaboration in respect of research and development and that S.O.E. would send out to America in the near future a wireless expert and a Special Devices expert. These officers would make contact tirough Colonel Donovan's organisation M. t.h Dr. Conant's organisation who are advising and conducting Research on behalf of Colonel Donovan's organi sation. In the meantime should Colonel Goodfellow wish to send a member of his organisation who Is directly connected wl th ' Research and Development Colonel Davies would be glad to wel come him at station IX.  Production.  S.O.E. have representatives namely Major Preeth and Mr. Billinghurst who are now working directly under Colonel Donovan's o rganisation. Colonel Davies would be pleased to receive them or any members of their staff for discussions at Station XII., DRAFT  RESEARCH 5c DEVELOPMENT  Col.GOODFELLOW and Col. DAVIES agreed that there should be close collaboration in respect of research and development and that S.O.E. would send oi\t to America in the near future a wireless expert and a Special Devices expert. These officers would make contact through G.50000 3 organisation with Dr. CONANT'S Organisation who are advising conducting research on behalf of G.50000's Organisation.  %-In the meantime should 0ol. GOODFELLOW wish to directly send a member of his organisation who Is connected  with Research and Development Gol. Davies v/ould be glad aJc AfNI to welcome him aniL aX .ar.G scl'l' dvi ce -a r  asslsliaim .  PRODUCTION  S.O.E. have representatives namely Major Freeth and Mr. Billinghurst who are now working directly under G.50000's organisation. Col. Davies would be pleased to receive them or any members of their staff for discussions at Station XII, 20th June 1942.  PROM M.  Reference attached I consider that in some cases the numbers of American S.O. officers to be attached at any one time are excessive and I suggest that they should be  americTecf to read as follows Radio Operation Station -1 Station 61 -1 Country Sections -4 It is assumed that the Naval Operational Station referred to is the one at Dartmouth which operates under 'C. The question of the numbers who can be taken at this establishment at any one time has not therefore been considered., SECRET a i  A/. S  Training  In the past three months several officers of the American S.O. organization have been permitted to attend the British S.O.E. training school at Toronto Canada where the training was carried on along the lines of the Para-Military and Advanced Schools. It is now considered extremely desirable that a large number of American Officers be permitted to attend the various specialized training schools in Great Britain and particularly is it considered essential that American 3.0/ Officers be detailed for short periods of time to the' various oper ational stations and offices in England. This will not only serve as a means of training for the individuals concerned but will be a most powerful factor in insuring unity of doctrine and effort in the future operations of the two national S.O. organizations. To insure this object it is requested that the American S.O. be permitted to send the following numbers of selected officers for approx imately one month's training at the schools or stations mentioned below  Establishment Number to be Total number sent at one to be sent. time. Para-Military Schools 1 3 Advanced Schools 1 3 Industrial Sabotage School 1 3 Propaganda School 1 3 Radio School 1 3 Radio operation Station 2 Parachute School 1 Camouflage Station 1  2  10 Station 12 2  Station 9 2  10 Station 61 iX 2  7  16 Naval Operational Station 2  Country Sections  6  SECRET, Copy No 4.. AP2/XX/XQ11 18.6.42 'ON PXSS%3l0r--WtfeJg 502 i.''/   fj i 18.6.4S. ' ' v ' p' '''p ' X . 31 I sZMW  pTQSQTit 6.SQ204i 6.300  . HEEBEARdK' M ' '  a 0 50201 atated that O.BOOOO iiad no rosearch establialxjstent nor did he Intend to Institute tfeie.' ' 'Shey would place/all f ithoir. sr y&p n fS bO and' O OOOl betorQ the Scientific  Advisory. Oeuhctl under fcli Cnai' dp of Dr dO . T.. - -.  h GvSOkoi asked m whether we had any requests as ' 'V-u- u regards scleg lfi i e&earg& aral 1 inipm d hipi that the P.S.R.  r had glveri 0 &t 60a of Itetos .ldb. Mfht be develotted and. / i tho it Itrujae as well to finish'those be&re ecibarkihg on any   t iS.tik iisw .. .'  o 1 Inforaed hlr . tl-iat. 'G 5 6Q1' and '6 506do were kept . .. currently advlis d aa to what %e were d'ot '/itii this 'country ' imd / bo far we had had nothing in return. I wor.M tlierefore . apnrrelute it if thl mtter conia ho taken up vdth G.50601  '.IV- . as we .wore anxious . to benefitby American. researo a experience.  I . Ip d Xt was finally suggested that at an early opi.iortun.lty .. representatives frori the Rucio and. Pe /iees.'. Bepartiaente of Station IX should proceed to Anerioa to discuss with 0.50600 /-1 i G. 6601 a.nd 0.50000 a cientiflC ad lR-erjs' the klhd . of'develop-  nt liah. should bo proceeded witii idea.and so avoid. . duplication.and ovlr-lapping XI. PR-ODtJgtion. . '  a G.502011rtfar ed lie tlvat .'G .506001 and G.50601 were now cktabllshCcl ip New fork and were in 'fact u nujl . b.is isroduo.tion  w ogroj r.ie . He . mentioned tiiat1 he had credit up to 60 0 0 000 5'krlk with viiicpltd''fiuiapa ' cductibh ' bro rasaji .'thd money being placed.in hie name and he in.turn placing it in the name of C.50600. . p ./k p..r e p /  ' b X then elaborated our conception of the relationship ' between. 3.0 E. and G.SQ'OhO s organic tloh' in respect of supplies Isuggested-  ' 1 /  - i that tlxere should be ah inter-chango of production . io .kX ttv f loiiit product on' planning shbuld be evolved. ./ The modalities of this were not discussed in detail HI. FXMRCE. I Informed 0 50201 that we b.c.d core to the conclusion that It would ipe better tn wipe put any ihlud. of cash transaction  'U between S.O.S dl d d OOO0i S'''Ohghhl P-tioh aftif thht' eaejalShOxild . supply th .other with gxcods without charge aud' there would  ' aorClit b f 5/e it 'hi/rbcoMlnhrt tyoas l ahd/'mtftbdrs of'roodB ' '  delivered ' . j   0 60201 stated that lie had reckoned on cash1 transaction '' ar d had in ' a ettsd forward for titl nnunt ho was' likely' 4 c/ k\ ato.iTurchase from ua but had hot. allowed for anv goods we'nirht obtain fro without payment . 1 ' w I pointed out to hl tliat if wo indulged ip cuch trahsactloni. it would probably hold up supplies in view of the fnmalitico, walch to be. .tajdar ne -Tyh h aides aa a''result of .tlie very.octepiloated fluanpial' agre eHieut's tseWeed. our -Jr'-   respo-ative' coiintrief ./ .  SU Sstod fciiiifc U 5 0-201 should ili-C -tl.ii MUtt-OI UT 0.50000 and' s lct-. I would.. ta ue It up wlfcp C D. ' ' '2ZZ r  . In t nqltJ ion . I suggest. -that perluvps it Mi kxt be a 'ood ...thing to m . a . .fiRa . with .G SQ000 ana 0. present in order to come..to some definite agreejapnt on this question of stipplie s pwi i rticuliar'revere . M . -.''  i . tiit gendfal /procedure h'fe 'ititerehunre' df figures joint p La.rming of 'production etcu '.'ll  ii the . rapdalitios of Supplyihg. each other  toe gather .peculiar position of a.50600 and 0.-50601  w r -aptuaiiy aatingf s KanaAj 'Agsnts for  d 50000. corie u vndor . S 0..E ha regards payment ' -tliough under -D.iSGOO.C' or direction., 23rd June 1942. FROM D/FIH.  COPY TO AD/Z AP/U.  Herewith a record of my interview with Col.Goodfellow on the 22nd June 1942., 22nd June 1942.  REGOSD OF IHTBRVILlf BETWEEN COLQIIEL GOQD LLOff & W/CSD. VEHt TER EEGARDING PIKMJCE  At Col.Goodfellow's request W/Cdr.Venner gave a general outline of S.O.E. finance and stated that funds drawn from the British Treasury for S.O.E. expenditure were charged to the secret vote. Ihile S.O.E. paid out of such funds the salaries of all Officers the pay of Other Ranks was met from the open votes of the Service Departments. Stores and equipment other than those of a special or most secret nature were also supplied by the Service Departments without a charge falling on  S.O.E. funds. l/Cdr.Venner stated that a normal month's expenditure of S.O.E. at the present time was about 350 000 covering operations throughout the world but that naturally in an organization such as S.O.E. the monthly expenditure was subject to much fluctuation dependent upon special projects and operations as they occurred and he informed Col.Goodfellow that in thinking of such a figure in connection with S.O.E. America he must bear in mind to what extent S.O.E. America would have to pay personnel and become liable to pay for stores &c. issued from Service sources.  Col.Goodfellow stated that up to now S.O.E. America had been financed from block grants from the President's secret fund but that now that it was becoming part of the Chiefs of Staff Department he was not certain what effect this would have in finance but he thought that grants would be made from Army votes which would be in the nature of confidential funds. He stated that all personnel. Officers included drew their pay from Service Departments.  A discussion then took place on the question of stores and equipment for use by the two S.O.E. organizations and w/cdr.Venner submitted a copy of the attached minute in regard thereto. Col.Goodfellow expressed his agreement with the procedure outlined in this minute and took a copy with him stating that it would be most useful to him in making the corresponding arrangements when he got back to America.  W/Cdr.Venner then raised the question of Messrs Ereeth and Billinghurst s duties and Col.Goodfellow stated that they were acting in an advisory capacity and while they call for quotations and issue orders for materials &c. from his office they had nothing to do with finance or accounting which were wholly dealt with by Col.Goodfellow's own Department. W/Cdr.Venner stated that he was glad to have this confirmation since Messrs Freeth and Billinghurst were technical men and were not presumed to have the ability or responsibility of handling financial and accounting matters., 20. 6. 42 The Office of Strategic Services and the Special Operations Executive both produce ordnance which will be used in practically every case for similar operations if not in respect of joint operations.  Suvject to S.O.E. for its part having to obtain approval of interested Government departments it is agreed that the following is the best procedure to be adopted in the interests of both parties  Resources should be pooled wherever possible and machinery set up   a To determine jointly the types and quantities which each organisation should produce  b The allocation of such production to the various operational centres.  c As regards the question of finance in respect of such production it was agreed that each side should finance their own production and that whilst detailed records should be kept of the destinations of all issues there will be no payments or financial obligations as between the two organisations or their respective Governments, The Office of Strategic Services and the Special Operations Executive both produce ordnance which will be used in practically every case for similar operations if not in respect of joint operations.  Subject to S.O.E. for its part having to obtain approval of interested Government departments it is agreed that the following is the best procedure to be adopted in the interests of both parties  Resources should be pooled wherever possible and machinery set up   a To determine jointly the types and quantities which each organisation should produce  b The allocation of such production to the5 various operational centres.  c As regards the question of finance in respect of such production it was agreed that each side should finance their own production and that whilst detailed records should be kept of the destinations of all issues there will be no payments or financial obligations as between the two organisations or their  respective Governments.  t, 20fch June 1942  AD3/US/1466  FROM yb.3.  I attach drai't of the record of our conversations with Colonel Goodfellcrw.  I do not know whether I have correctly interpretated what was agreed regarding N.Africa and Portugal.  A few words were also said about Spain which I have not included. Nor have I made any reference to the point you raised for the W.African Mission as I am not quite sure that I would get it right.  '  Qi, aOfch June 1942  AD3/Ub/1466  ESCORD OP PURTHER DISCUSSION RIDG-ARDIHJ COLLABORATION BETWEEN BRITISH AND AMERICAN S.O.E. AT A MEETING HELD ON 19TH JUNE 1942.  Balkans and Mid East.  It was agreed that paragraph 8 of the record of the previous meeting constituted a fair record.  Regarding the reference therein to direct communication between Wash ington and the Head of the American Mission in Cairo it was agreed that all such telegrams whether originating from Washington or Cairo should be repeated to the American Mission attached to S.O.E. London. It was also agreed that it would be the responsibility of the American Mission in London  to keep S.O.E. London informed as to the content of all such messages which affect British interests. It was agreed that if the American Mission set up their own War Station in Cairo this would be used only for communications with Washington as the War station belonging to S.O.E. Mid East is already adequate for handling all communications with agents in the field.  A discussion ensued regarding supplies of equipment from America to  S.O.E. Mid East. It was pointed out that such equipment comes under two categories namely  a Service Equipment including aircraft naval craft arms ammunition medical stores building materials transport parachutes containers clothing field telephones sad  b Non-Service Specialised Equipment including explosives sabotage devices W.T. sets. War Station and Broadcasting equipment etc. etc. With regard to the former it was pointed out that S.O.E. is the British Government Department created for waging subversive warfare but that C-in-C. Mid East is responsible for all operations in that theatre of war. S.O.E. plans must therefore conform to C-in-C's operational requirements and to the strategic requirements of the Chiefs-of-Staff. They are therefore sub mitted to C-in-C. for his concurrence and in carrying them out S.O.E. are  acting as his agent.  It follows that all requests for equipment in this category must originate from S.O.E. Mid East who must look to C-in-C. Mid East in the first place for the facilities and stores required for operations which he  has approved. If however he is unable to supply S.O.E. Mid East advise -1, S.O.E. London and if they cannot be obtained in the United Kingdom S.O.E. London apply through the appropriate Ministry and Munition Assignment Boards to Washington. And it is at this stage that support from G.50 000 for such applicationsmll be of the greatest value. It was remarked that this machinery has been set up to enable the combined Chiefs-of-Staff to pool the resources of the United States and Great Britain and allocate them to the various theatres of war having regard also to transport facilities.  It was agreed that it will therefore be impossible for S.O.E. Mid East to make direct application to the American S.O.E. for equipment of this type. It was considered however that if the American S.O.E. can become possessed of aircraft seacraft etc. it might be possible for them to send them to their own Mission in the Middle East and place hem at the disposal of the British S.O.E. organisation. In doing this however it would be necessary for the American S.O.E. to send their own crews and spares etc. so that the aircraft could be serviced as an independent unit and it is clear that even this plan would involve negotiations with the military authorities in Egypt. Nevertheless it was agreed that S.O.E. London should make up a list of equipment in this category of which they stand in need and supply it to the American s.O.E.  Begarding Non-Service Equipment it was pointed out that the British  S.O.E. are themselves manufacturing all their own special devices and W.T. sets. At the same time it was agreed that there was a shortage of certain types of W.T. sets and broadcasting equipment. Accordingly it was agreed that S.O.E. London should make up a list of their requirements under this heading and supply it to the American S.O.E. And it was agreed that so far as this equipment was concerned there could be no objection to the American S.O.E. either   a despatching it to their American Mission in the Mid East or  b supplying it direct to S.O.E. MLd East. Regarding personnel it was explained that there is believed to be a shortage of W.T. operators in the Middle East and that it would be useful if say 10 trained W.T. operators could be attached to the American Mission for  work in the S.O.E. Mid East's War Station near Cairo. It was also pointed out -2, that S.O.E. Mid East today recruits the majority of its Greek and Jugoslav personnel from their respective armies and that it was desirable to obtain nationals of these two countries and of Bulgaria Roumania and Hungary from other quarters ouch personnel should be trained as W.T. operators and as  expert organisers for infiltration into occupied countries where they can  assist friendly elements to organise passive resistance sabotage and revolt.  finally it was agreed that the detail as to the form and extent of the American Mission and the activities which it might undertake should be discussed between the British Head of S.O.E. l Ld East and a representative of the American S.O.E. and that their recommendations should be referred to London and Washington for ratification. North Africa and the Iberian Peninsula.  It was agreed that North Africa with the exception of Spanish Morocco should be an America area to whicn an American Mission should be sent with headquarters say at Tangiers but that a British Mission would continue to function in Gibraltar.  Policy iahould be initiated in Washington in consultation with S.O.E. London and instructions would be sent from Washington to the American Head of the Mission repeated to the British laission in Gibraltar for their infor mation.  The initiation of plans for carrying out policy and the control of operations themselves in North Africa iwith the exception of the Spanish Morocco would be the sole responsibility of the American Head of the Mission. The British Mission would however provide the American Mission with sea transport for infiltrating personnel all stores and equipment required and put their War Station at the disposal of the American Mission for communica ting with agents in the field. They would also continue to control their own agents in Spanish Morocco.  It was also agreed that a committee should be set up presided over by  the Governor of Gibraltar and consisting of representatives of the American  and British Missions in order to ensure co-ordination.  Regarding Portugal it was agreed that this should be taken over by  the American S.O.E. and that they should become responsible for working with  the 3 W.T. sets which have already been placed.  -3, MOST SECRET . ADU/MS/ 17th June 1942. TO D PROM AD/U. / I attach notes on the various conversations I have discussed direct with G. In fact I have now covered all the ground except the New York Organization and the appointment of Louis Franck. Until I hear from C.D. again I am not bringing up the question with G. So far I have done nothing about the Agenda for G.50 000 AD/XX/2250 . There are a good many points in this but they chiefly concern other Directorates., MOST SECRET. ADU/AMS/127. 17th June 1942. TO G / PROM AI/G. Copies to C.D A.D. Xf I attach some notes on the. various poinfcs milch U and I ch. seussoC yesterday shovilng the various decisions arrived at., MOST SBCKST  17tH June 1942. 1. CARIBBEAN PLAN. 0 explained that owing to certain details in the plan wnioli he felt might be open to grave criticism from the American Chiefs of Staff he had arranged with Brigadier Dykes to withdraw this plan from circulation at the moment. He was however in full agreement that all possible steps should be taken to radicate the use of re-fuelling bases in the Caribbean by German submarines if in fact this was the case. He had already sent a special S.I.S. mission to that territory to establish what was the true position. In the meantime he thought that we should certainly discuss the matter generally with the Admiralty He handed us certain detailed criticisms of the plan which we are now considering with a view to re-drafting. This matter will not be dropped.  2. ARGENTINE A.M.A AD/U explained that he had seen Sir David Kelly who expressed the desire for a Liaison Officer with S.O.E. on his own staff and said that he had two officers whom he thought might be suitable They would naturally be trained   ACTION  by us before taking up the appointment. G. said that he was  - seeing Sir David Kelly shortly and would take up this matter with him. G. will let us know whether any definite appoint ment is agreed upon so that we may contact the necessary  candidate.  3. G.11.Q00.  I AD/UaskedG.whetherthereportsfromG 11 000onMs interview with Sohnake and other Chilean Government politicians had been Shown to Y.P. Santiago and whether Y.P. Santiago was in full agreement with .11 000 s activities. We pointed out also that G.11 000 Is a member of the Diplomatic Mission in Santiago and any interference in local politics by a member of the Diplomatic Mission might be taken as an expression of H.M G e policy. Sooner or later we would have to defend these activities with the Foreign Office and G. replied that G.11 000 was on very friendly terns with Y.P. and that he felt sure that the general policy had been approved by Y.P. but he was not certain that the actual report had been seen by Mm.  II 0. reported that G.11 000 was her and had definite proposals of a political nature which he hoped would assist in persuading Chile to break off diplomatic relations with the Axis. G. asked whether it was a definite Foreign Office policy that we should attempt to achieve this. AI/0 replied that under the Prime Minister s ruling we were unable to undertake any internal political activities without Foreign Office approval and it would be necessary therefore to dis cuss the whole matter with MSt them. It is important that G.11 000 should call at this office so that we may know exactly what his proposals are and so that he may return to his territory with the least possible delay.  4. SAFE KEEPING QF DWS IK TRINIDAD AND ELSEWHERE. G. assured AD/U that he was making the proper arrangements P.T.Q., id for tlie storing and custody of the large amount of stores  which had arrived or was about to arrive in Trinidad He  had obtained the services of a very reliable local resident  whom he felt sure would be excellent for the purpose  AD/U asked a his views on the success of Lingesssn s tour and the value of the reports received from him 0 replied that he thought the tour had been very useful and that the reports were of value and interest. Me hoped to be able to make further good use of Lingeman s services He had not heard any reactions good or bad from agents in the field as a result of Ling man s tour  6. P/H.8 G stated that while h/H.2 was performing extremely valuable work in America'in training recruits he felt that if he were needed for really important work in the field he could not stand in the way If therefore this was the case ho was prepared to release him and he would be available for  AC pi U. service in the Balkans within throe weeks U. undertook to confirm with the Balkans Section that this was the case  7. P.W.H. AD/U explained that P W E Headquarters In London had decided to send its own P W E Mission to the U 3 A Shis would be under the charge of David Bowes-Lyon. We had asked Bowes-Lyon what his ideas were for the future organisation in America Bowes-Lyon had intimated that P.W.E desired a separate office and would like to take at least two of G s S 0 Propaganda Staff  It was generally agreed that S 0 Hew York should remain P W E s agents in Hew York and that if Bowes-Lyon wished to make use of our organization he himself should work under G. in America If on the other hand P.W.E insisted on having their separate organization then we should say that we were unable to release our staff In ary case P W E. will want to make use of 0 0 communications  It was further agreed that it was necessary to retain G s Propaganda staff to attend not only to P W E s activities but also for work in South America which we anticipate carrying out in co-operation with the Ministry of Infcarnation. Liaison with P W D of the War Department which now comes under G 30 000 s control will also require to be carried on  8. FIMAKCS AD/U said that D/FIN. was most anxious to discuss financial matter with G and this would probably take about an hour. ICTIONI It was arranged that D/PIH. would make his own appointment with 6  9 W/T HETWORK -WESTERH HEMISPHERE.  It was arranged that this should be discussed in conjunction  CTIOHl with Al/Z and a time for this discussion will be arranged by AD/Z. G however handed us a rough estimate of costs which shows a total capital cost of /102 000 an estimated running cost of /8 Q00 per month It was agreed at this meeting subject, to AD/Z a Viewa tbat iix spite of the unhappy jcporienoea In the past in joint arrangements with for w/t oomunioafciono it would be advisable to have a joint arrangement in Amorlea Any past disadvantages of this  joint working having arisen elsewhere should be eliminated  in the Americas owing to the fact that both organisations worit unaer 0.  I IGHI This will have to be discussed with M but as far as the  m. ap/U Directorate is concerned it is felt that the time has  arrived when we should close the school Moat of our own agents have been through courses and 0 50 000 Is establishing his own schools It was agreed that S.T S 103 had been of immense value both to us and in starting the Americans off on the right line  is 0 s view that it is impossible at the moment to say what the fate of the 'school should be but he is very much against the immediate closing down He thinks that in some form or other it will have valuable duties to perform for some time  to coma He pointed out that as the main line station for communication with England was being erected at the school certain personnel would be required there in any case It is  our recommendation that this question should be definitely reviewed again on 1st August  11. LIAISOH WITH AMERICA IN REGARD TO MANUFACTURE STORAGE XiTp SHIFMENT 0 DEVigM We explained to 0 that this had been discussed thoroughly, between 8 f andAMUandwrittenminutes  had been prepared for Q T 3. to take back to jy&eriea wltb  a view to settlpg up the requisite maehlnsry for eoordlmting those supplies  as smfiQH m  6 felt timt we ould keep the Station In 'loronto available but agreed that it was impossible to urdortaice a genoral forgery ass lgn Se stressed fcue facilities  available and tiiouglit that tiiey mlgtxt be useful to us on tills side on occasions  ACflOSt in regard to the forging of Batik lotos. It was agreed that 0 stviuld dlmusM this with  is.   It was agrood a & gomx-el pt'lneiple that S 0 g should not bear the r eponslbility for Activity Pictures to be proclueed and circulated in Aaerioa S said that tills is entirely a P.W.g business an tiuit if under the new 8set-up8 we were unlikely to b engaged either alone or with the  Americans wo could proba.6dy discontinue this  14 Mr188  rmo iiyniTilt have beenMMM over to fi it has been made quit clear that these are being produced by Colonel Seibert ofthePsychologicalWarfare 1op&rtszoatandimw  AgfXOli mtMre to do with Donovan 0 Organisation. I tSiiBk that  -IT M.winreportontaleinduecourse  X6 CO ISI M.  Um pointed out Umt we w r discussing with the M of i mtmsxw whereby we could assist In teicir work in Botth terries Th M of X are at present producing pl&ris for each individual country which they are gubaittiag and   on receipt of which we will pit forward suggestions foreign Office consent will have to be obtained generally for those activities 0 was in a eement   Wedidlastdiscussinanydetailtheorganisationof  S 0 S ofl'ie in Hmv York and wmemm ganasetlly in tb Western Hemiapicro. It is understood boat tide will be discussed between C P and G,  H  t 22 G. 48  Slx&ee s nust bo found th following aus ootion is put toward  2. lortb Africa ineludiag Bpax&ah Porccco to bo  rogsrdM as prodoesdxiaxitl so Ajasrlcaa spinnso of influsoeo   5 The African's 0 B to ost blli& fclio 'Mission for Torth .pfrleo tho Uoad .of wouM bo raspoasibl for 3 o  . -ctivitieo in tlmt area So xiating British orgariiat-tion would eontime ard its p rsonr l wo aM romfei Ktednistratir'clj and op r.' tlomlly responsible to a British head but the latter would operate under tbs general direetloa and control of t i Aiaarlcais. head of the lUssicans stachiner will be set up to t2iis end.  5 General policy ouM be agreed between ' asblngtcaa and London ajod Instruct would be Issued by sshlngion to tl L. Acsertcais head ff tbs 'AtmIon a copy of any auch oproed Instructions would be sent frost tmidon to tit Head of the British organisation  4 Gibraltar as an S base fro which supplies of arsss and equigsaent transport facilities and ' /T facilities are op.de avallabl would retmin uttclde the area of the Iorth gfricaa s&aaie i and under the control of the H d of the British S 0 K organisation  S In order to ensure the closest eo-oparetioa and liaison betwfen the Mission end the local .British Civil and fUlltar-y suthcritiee mcldnery will be sot up wisleh will enable the Governor and C -in-C. and the British Caas l  icnoral Tangier to e sreiae the necees-ary supervision sjM co-oxulImtion., ADL/XX/23 19th June 1942  PROM AD/L  Herewith a draft paper for submission to the C.O.S. on S.O.E. activity in North Africa.  2. I feel the right procedure would be to get the Americans to agree to the compromise before we submit it to the Chiefs of Staff. This will of course involve certain minor amendments to the attached paper. 3. If we do not adopt this course and the Americans fail to agree to the compromise we shall make ourselves look very foolish., S.O.E. ACTIVITY IN NORTH AFRICA ... .  GENERAL  1. RepreseatatIvoa of the British and U.S. organisations for special operations have been discussing joint cooperation throughout the world and as a result of these discussions a considerable measure of agreement has been reached except in the case of North Africa. BRITISH Vllv.'/S 2. British representatives suggested that North Africa should be regarded for the present as a British sphere of influence. If this principle v/as acceptable to their American colleagues the British representatives proposed that the whole of the Iberian Peninsula and North Africa should be grouped together as a single mission with headquarters at Gibraltar and should be controlled from London. 5. The factors which influenced the British representatives in making these proposals were that a The present Allied O.-in-C. in this part of the world the Governor and C.-in-C. Gibraltar -is British.  b Gibraltar forms a natural base for such operations into North Africa.  o The present facilities for operations into North Africa are almost entirely British the W/T stations are at Gibraltar the supplies of arms and equipment and the shipping facilities for their introduction. Moreover some of these facilities such as the ships are not under the direct control of S.O.E. but of the British Naval and Military authorities.  d London is probably the better operational head quarters for controlling these operations at the present stage both from the point of vie / of distance and the facilities for consultation of the interested parties.  e The Iberian Peninsula is closely linked with North Africa since the British Ambassador in i. adrid V L has a direct interest in Spanish Morocco and an indirect one-in the French North African situation.. AMERICAN VIEWS  4. The tf.S. representatives expressed the view that North1 Africa should be regarded as a predominantly American sphere. They proposed that an American mission with headquarters at Gibraltar should control all operations under the direction of Washington. They felt that North Africa should be separated from the Iberian Peninsula and that separate arrangements should be made for Anglo-American cooperation in the latter area. nsdf'T.I ' .ijtf-cM eiv   5. In making these proposals thay had heen influenced by the  a Any approaches to authorities in North Africa would almost certainly hate to be made through American channels., isr pewntiona i&iXcfa it b dbaitllad .. to m3BV ' Oat ia.ilort i KZvXfyx wouia aSssoat aoi taioly  Oa tho f eaponalulilty of W%b OMS&oriti imd -  Vi %fm eor Kuia wiaid. too Aisofieiuft . ulBOussloui-with-rreiiete jtj boan i piP ' 'to tto wi i ttooconari polio to too &ciojii Ei toowwi Qrth iiv V i'i ' 'eV ld WXtfe mi ti diplcemtie naXatioiie with Vlohy snfcs o riattes for .t-xfiiiiBgt.orj. s dooieioa  and it vmc .aijgolatoiy oasontial too oooittinttto any  politriotti aili wy.iatiojaat in north Africa Witts tit poiioy o tiji wtoitfe ' 'iwiapoft iotot stid-'tofeO'  of darfiiro .in '. wifcingtoa aii m dorks' Eitost - i. .iV - A 0i of' th i&ftof.ljj orj anioatiOTi asjgagod' -thoao- i-ifV '    i .aoEisfetoon aloo. niiioo a acirnprofiioo r iat to -fOugs 'U its is 'item tto f f of sood ato DritiBii &&& I SlVWithI1' & oiKpRita oj  Lsaions oot with  j   OO OOtoiOOO to this9   o iisoriosyn siosion Woiild -fell -sole o .  ogwntofl iso ilortli Af ioa ofid oooid ooto te6 % aii sHo tiAtjUKoci with tto fronohTtiXitoory aiid oiitoio&i attthoyit1 s / oyonatiom os 4 3 ito 70v4 f o ' Ariorioaos '&zm& woitid to o stfia d to 'toitoe l8&k% oould 'c nwrfHatf out' frosa..tottomitar' fooh aa' rayiaiijfta -i i naiupo] ' of &7 8j ociu psofit futd 1/5 aots to 10 dlasi%fehto oi d ttss  S ''iftuorai poll.. - % o   .toAr' tpaartem in.nai&iij tosa 'aau. .uotodost -toifto 'tli -.utoitisl ami A ric    3 L     MptM 1pBK.il i iflflljLli irc r uctoioijji W l3Wtolsr'fyOia t ' v Wt i oo'ol tooieTatoion and iiaiaon tauato toe vooy oiosa ws ntsbil autito tstow as asa'ajaarittas' oobcwowMe -wiOi appoiittoad foap 1 4 asroa t i 'to9vamwr anW toias io ai. 411i d no aartdsrji wool too nosponsitole ror th cowtliitatIon osr tlto v  m t ta. two-niia.aii&wa . It 'wottid cfooto toliia ttoroui s.. an isi iQ   r4tt0lRiaait ooso'sittOa O or wfiieh h wtssilti %3v&i\l k   lo in viw of tit fast that s .cj.i toava ttoaswi. tstan aa Oireativ . S.0 a . 4 luH o few tlioir actoivitoi in I5 rtb p piaoia oortain twa-f aitoiMtiaa upon thaw vdo viti tf of 11uff to i i to itjt ffays . toteto oaca a ew ise1 augaaiwtoatt'-Atootf Or gia i' furtolj. dlroetion aa to -tatoo.. iiao oti iSSioh .iv  . tolt j ooa iitk aooJif'A. ooaqprtwdLaa''' ahauld to roaoh .U Amend the present S.O.E North African directive or preferably in cooperation with the U.S. authorities have a joint directive issued to the British and American organisations. 19th ViAr- 194 ., U RGENT - to mnmim g rm cl. i Pill h ti Iw 1 rmiy to Ms sj'seial taiiiKiek 8 ia.s.% a way fe eitw wt tia t Ms view Arts fully  sprswiswi.  1, 15th June 194 .  NOTE ON CONVERSATION tITH G.SO.OOQ.  1 I asked G.50 000 whether he approved my memorandum In principle which I had sent him through G. he replied that he did and that he had shown it to General Chaney who had also approved it. He was going to show it to Winant to-night or tomorrow to make sure that the State department were committed  I asked whether he would allow some members of his staff to get down to it with my staff'in order to s.gree the detailed arrangements by regions taking the general principles as their guiding note. He said that he would instruct Colonel Goodfellow to get in touch with AD first thing in the morning.  We then I'fen through the countries in which there might be any difficulties and it was agreed that thepEr East including China and Burma in so far as it was controlled from China were obviously American spheres of hfluence where the British Missions would work under the general guidance of  the Americans. It was also agreed that the Atlantic Island would be pre dominantly under American influence but special arrangements would have to be made in the Iberian Peninsula and North Africa. G.50 000 explained that here  the. feelings ofthe State Department would have to be taken into consideration and also the fact that in Vichy France and in North Africa the Americans were more popular rdth the pencil and were.in a stronger position to put things over  then the British. He agreed however ' that for the present at any rate the general supervision of the Mission should be British with the head in Gibraltar with guidance coming from London and that the Americans on the spot although  they were officially controlled from New York would not take any action without authority either from London or the British head on the spot.  G.50 000 then said that he was going to withdraw G.50 Q0 homej he was afraid that G.50 200 would do both of us harm owing to his extreme un popularity with the State Department and the fact that his position was so well known to the Vichy authorities he feared he might blow both of us if left there and he had therefore decided to send Eddy back in his place. AB AD/W and AD/B must go very carefully when negotiating this situation and  must be broad minded on paper relying on the goodwill of those on the spot to make the machine work under the British supervision. Although G.50 000 agreed to what I said I am not sure that he was very happy about it and I think he would like to see things in a little more detail before finally  committing himself.  2 G.50 000 was very keen on Italy. He has sn expert on Italy and wants us to help him to infltrate and communicate from Egypt and Malta. He hasalso got some plan for attacking the Italian Feet at Taranto I think it is al together pretty vague and has been put up to him by one of his pals. I told him I would get one ofthe experts to talk to him about Italy and investigate how we could co-operate.  The head of the American Mission in the Middle East would probably be the late American Military Attache in Rome who has many acquaintances among captured\4rmy/Ttslian 0fficers.  5 As regards the Missions in London and New York his ideas were that he should have the Mission here with a responsible head working along side us but in addition to this he should send bitches of Officers say 10 to 15 at a time to get thoroughly acquainted in the way we did things and fcuireturn to America  to train his people. He was very anxious that they should see the way tre organised ourselves as if we were operating in the field and not as they do in America as if they held a nbig business organisation at their disposal. He  liked the way we made single tilings do our -work for us  'JIsjL tcLliujj fce. Iu-uju . l/ffe r 4 -Aii rngarde hi . ihIh . iftr'.i ftiwm cnmrnr-.qr hi on he agreed that he should concentrate on preparing American personnel with knowledge of languages to infiltrate into Europe and Africa just before or just behind the American Array proper. He felt that the maximum co-operation with the American Army was essential as he was now. under the direct control of the Chiefs of Staff. He, was therefore appointing a first class American S 0.E lielson Officer with the American Army headquarters over here.  5 I urged that his English Mission should be housed in the same building as ours on different floors. I stated that I thought I could provide them with accommodation if he would agree to is. He agreed that the two  as possible together hut I gather that he is   Jissions s as clo ---but  bins Me I.S. and S.O.E. Missions in the same   inclined t lea ofpu   building wo that we may not Be able to get what we want in this respect unless we can cajole David Bruce.  6 As regards our representation in New York he was very keen that  we should have a Mission working alongside him but I explained that ss far  as we were concerned G. was head of S.O.E. and I thought that all that was  necessary was to give G. a first class man with full knowledge of affairs  here to take charge ofS.O.E. administration under him and it would be up to G.S0 000 G. and. this man to agree how theiW fixed up their Mission in America.  I said that I thought 1 would be the best man to send as far as we were con  cerned He asked whether I had got G. s approval but I said that I had not yet put the question but I hoped he would help in putting the question over. He agreed to do so.  7 Finally it was agreed that I should circulate my memorandum to Ismay and Cadogan as having been agreed by hhim and he having agreed it with General Chaney would so the same thing with Win&nt.  3 He promised to instruct Goodfellow who would he his man to get in touch with AD so as to start discussions at 11a.m. tomorrow morning., 14th June 1942  I enclose herewith a copy of the documents that are Inside the letter to G.50 000 also enclosed .  Just before he left us last night 0.50 000 told ise that as he was lunching with Cheney tonorrow it would help to have sorte idea of what was in our rinds. As you know I carried him & good way in conversation during dinner so you may not think it necessary to go much further. I therefore leave it to your discretion as to whether you ao or cio not give the letter to C-.5d 000 before we have finished our tour tomorrow.  I am open-minded on the matter as it is & problem for somebody who knows the character of the recipient and you are the expert in this case.  Your very sincerely., CD/2257  14th June 1S42.  Frocraiaue for tpriorrov Here is the programme for our trip tomorrow  10.30 a.a. Leave Claridges Hotel and visit Kensington Camouflage Establishagsnt. 12 noon Visit Baker Street to inspect the Operations Room and visit  -Scandinavian and French Sections offices.  1 p.m. Return to Claridges for lunch.  2.30 p.m. Leave Claridges for Station IX which is the Research Establish ment for raq o and special toys 5 p.m. Tea at Station IX.  5.30 p.m. Arrive at station XII which is the trial ground production plant and packing station for all special MtoysM and gadgets. 7.45 p.m. Arrive back at Claridges. Transport cars will be at Claridges at 10.30 a.m. The following officers will accompany the party   throughout as well as myself -   Colonel Davies and hr. Keswick.  Brigadier Gubbins and Colonel Taylor will meet the party at Baker Street and I hope that Mr. Ean u\ry William, and Air Commodore Boyle will accompany the party to Stations IX and XII. Could you let Keswick know by telephone this evening of whom your party Will consist He Tttill ring you up this evening., A  / AD/XX/2251. 13th June 1942.  TO C.D. PROM A.D.  AGEM3A FOR G.  1 set out hereunder the subjects which as a result of the replies to the circular sent out to Directors appear to require discussion with 0. I am adding my comments as to how 1 would suggest they should be discussed attaching relevant papers.  1. ORGANISATION OP S.O.E. OFFICE IN NEW YORK AND S.O.E. MACxlINE GENERALLY IN THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE.  xhis involves the whole question of sending out Louis Franck to work under G. as officer in charge of S.O.E. activities in the Western Hemisphere. These discussions will of course have to be undertaken personally by you with G. There are no papers to be attached on the subject as we are quite clear about what we are aiming at and the whole subject must be a matter of rather delicate negotiation.  2. POSITION AS REGARDS S.O.E. ACTIVITIES IN SOUTH AMERICA. You will undoubtedly want to handle this question your self with G. putting him In the picture as to the way in which the situation is developing this end and hearing from him his view as to the probable course of events in Washington. It will also be necessary to reach agreement with him on the lines on which we should carry out the recommendations of the Chiefs of Staff which can now be regarded as having the approval of the War Cabinet. I therefore attach hereto at 2. the Chiefs of Staff paper in question.  We should also discuss with G. the immediate outlook in South America with particular reference to telegram No.   at 2b 104/105 of 9.6.42. I would suggest that apart from perhaps a general reference by you this matter can best be handled by A/DU.  3. FINANCE. D/FIN wishes to discuss finance with G. and I attach hereto at 3. his note on the subject.  4. W/T NETWORK FOR THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE. The position regarding this problem is briefly set out in paragraph 8. of the attached memorandum from U. at 4. I suggest that this can best be discussed by G. with A/DU MS & A/DZ and that there is no need for you to worry about it unless they come up against some Issue of principle which must be decided by you., 2  5. LIAISON YifITH C 1H SOPTxl AlVlfiRICA. The position is as set out in a memorandum from A/DU attached at 5. I suggest that this can he left for A/DU to handle with  G. 6 FUTURE OF S.T.S. 105.  The situation in regard to this question is set out in three memoranda which ere attached two from G.T.l at 6a and 6b and one from MT at 6c . I suggest that you should leave it to A/DTJ and M to broach this subject with G. keeping you advised on the course of the discussions.  7. LIAISON WITH AMERICANS IN REGARD TO MANUFACTURE STORAGE AND SHIPMENT OF DEVICES. This arises out discussiore held with G.T.l a record of which is attached in a memorandum at 7. I suggest that discussions on this subject should be left to A/DU and A/DZ.  8. STATION M. This was another question raised by G.T.l and Is covered by a memorandum from U. attached at 8a. This can be left to A/DU.  9. ACTIVITY' PICTURES. This was another matter raised by G.T.l and the substance is given in a memorandum from U. attached at 9a together with copies of telegram from New York 99201 and telegram 2063 to  ew York attached at 9b.  10 S-O.E. IN PARAGUAY.  Substance of this matter Is covered by telegram No.04505 from New ork attaahed at 10 and discussion can be left to A/DU.  11. MASS MANUFACTURE OF PISTOLS FOR DROPPING OVER OCCUPIED TERRITORY. Substance of this matter is covered in No. 83819 from New York attached at 11a No.2021 to New lork attached at lib. No. 94628 from New York attached at 11c. and No.2079 to New York attached at lid. This can be left for discussion to M. and A/DU.  12 COOPERATION WITH M.O.I. IN LATIN AMERICA.  It has been agreed in principle that the M.O.I should send us some general suggestions as to how we can assist them. The substance of the matter is contained in a memorandum attached at 12. and the whole subject can be left for discussion to A/DU., ADU1/AMS/90 4.6.42. To AD/U. From AP/U.l  As a result of a letter dated. 1st June to O.B. from the Minister of Information in which he approves the suggestion that conversations between the South American organisations of S.O.E. and M.o.I. should continue U.l. and I today had an interview with Mr. Bonham Carter head of the Latin American division of the M.o.I  1. . ..'e explained that as our further consultations were now approved we wer6 anxious to co-operate in any way in which we could help M.o.I. in Latin America. Bonham Carter knew of the letter from his Minister to C.D. and had been instructed to get in touch with us for the same purpose. 2. He said that they particularly required assistance in activities which the M.o.I. could not undertake themselves. He mentioned securing the arrest of Axis agents whether by bribing the police or otherwise the bribery of other persons in the Police Press and Radio Services v/hom M.o.I. could not approach directly assistance in the spreading of rumours and contacting of minority movements particularly the Basques whom he consi dered to be one of the strongest influences in Latin America and the possibility of organising letter-writing campaigns by persons with relatives in Europe. He said that in certain cases the M.o.I. had been over ruled by the Foreign Office and prevented from pursuing projects which they had formed in Latin America.  Be added that he was in the process of writing a brief for S.O.E. setting out the lines on which they thought we could help them.  3. We agreed that we could certainly help the M.o.I. but we pointed out that for all action in neutral countries we are our selves subject to the F.O. ruling. We said that we would await his brief and then explain more fully what we could do immediately and in what respects we would have to approach the F.O. ourselves. 4. We then discussed the dissemination of rumours for which M.o.I. have their own organisation but it was agreed that we could be of great assistance in this work through our own channels and in countries to which their organisation does not extend. We pointed out that we should need to be fed with material which we are not at present receiving. The 'rumours which we now send to lew York from F.W.E. are for European pur poses and ..o.I. say that they have great difficulty in getting anything from P. W.E. specifically for Latin America 5. M.o.I. will in future send us copies of their weekly directives for Latin America and it was agreed that when we are able to start co-operating \ ith M.o.I. in the field we should instruct our agents that in addition to receiving specific rumours they should keep themselves informed of the M.o.I. directives sent each week to the Press Attaches in each country if they are not already doing so 6. Bonham Carter told us that M.o.I. are producing a detailed plan of propaganda for each Latin American country analysing the country /, country indicating the propaganda objectives and the means which it is proposed to employ against the various sections of each community. These plans will be approved by the F.O. and can then be taken as representing the policy of H.M.G. with regard to each country.  The plan of the Argentine is now in the hands of the F.O and those for Chile and Brazil are well advanced. As each plan is approved M.o.I. will send them to us and we expect then to be able to suggest other ways in which we may help  7. We referred to the possible suppression of Axis agents and it was agreed that though our list is probably fuller than M.o.I 8 they will let us have the names of their particular aversions 8 Bonham Carter concluded by saying that in any approach we had to make to the F.O regarding any project put forward by the M.o.I. we should have Mr. Grubb's full support and indeed if we  ever thought it would be of use to us to have the Ministry of Information's support for any of our own projects they would be glad to help us., //  LOCAL NO.465. PRIVATE CYPHER TELEGRAM FROM NEW YORE. &XXXXX Deep. 1315 Reed. 2245 83819. AD/U FROM G. YOUR TSLEGRAI 86l MAY 8th. A. I AM INFORMED BY P.W.D. OF W.M. PRODUCTION PISTOLS HAS BEEN APPROVED BY G. LAND C.O.S. AND THAT ONE MILLION OF THEM WITH TWENTY MILLION ROUIIDS OF .45 AMMUNITION WILL BE AVAILABLE BY END OF JULY NEXT. B. MECHANISM IS VERY SIMPLE AND MANUFACTURE IS ENTIRELY STAMPING PROCESS. .P.W.D. HAVE A. ONE A. PRIORITY FOR THIS WEAPON WHICH IS BEING MANUFACTURED SECRETLY AS VERY LIGHT PISTOL. C. Y.H. REALISES THAT A POST PISTOL WOULD BE FAR PREFERABLE BUT POINTS OUT ITS MANUFACTURE IN SUCH QUANTITIES AND TIME WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE. D. THEIR IDEA IS THAT SECRET ARMING OF CIVIL POPULATION OF OCCUPIED TERRITORIES PREREQUISITE OF ANY SUCCESSFUL INVASION IT MIGHT ALSO PROVIDE MEANS FOR A WELCOME CONTINENTAL DIVERSION SHOULD AN INVASION OF ENGLAND 3E ATTEMPTED. SUGGEST S.O.E. IS BEST EQUIPPED DEPARTMENT TO EFFECT DISTRIBUTION BUT P.W.D. WOULD WANT USE OF IT TO BE SUBJECT TO GENERAL PLAN UNDER O.O.S. THEY CONCEIVE POSSIBILITY IMPORTANT STATING PLAN BEING CREATED ON BASIS OF THIS NEW WEAPON. E. S.O.E. MAY WISH TO PARTICIPATE IN CREATION AND IMPLEMENTING OF SUCH A PLAN. TP EYW 1010 20.5.42., LOCAL 420 CIPHER TEL. JJESP. TO NEW YORK 26.5.42. No 2021. YOUR 83819.  A. WE CONSIDER PROPOSAL HAS GREAT POSSIBILITIES AND DEFINITELY FORESEE USE FOR THESE WEAPONS. B. SECPET ARMING OF CIVILIAN POPULATION IS'ONE OF MAIN OBJECTS OF S.O.E. WHICH IN ALL .MATTERS CONNECTED WITH T fIS WORK AGTS UNDER ORDERS OF CHIEFS OF STAFF. C. S.O.E. MUST REMAIN IN CONTROL OF ANY PLAN FOR OR GANISING CIVIL POPULATIONS IN EUROPE SINCE ACTION MUST BE CLOSELY COORDINATED ITH THAT OF RUGULAR MILITARY FORCES FOR WHICH HJRPOSE WE ARE IN TOUCH WITH G.H.Q. N  D. ALTHOUGH KULLY REALISING THEREFORE THE VALUE CF THE PROPOSAL FURTHER CONSIDERATION WOULD BE REQUIRED IF ITS ACCEPTANCE INVOLVED ANY QUESTION OF S.O.E. RELINQUISHING CONTROL OVER THE FORMULATION AND IMPLEMENTING OF SUCH A PLAN. TP AT 2325 26.5.42. PQ  ORIGIN U., LOCAL 802. CIPHER TELEGRAM FROM NEW YORK. DESPATCHED 1710 28/5/42 94628 RECEIVED 0130 29/5/42   AD/tJ FROBi G YOUR TELEGRAM 21 mAY 26th. A. PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE DIVISION OF WM. DO NOT SUGGEST ANY INDEPENDENT ACTION AND SULLY APPRECIATE THAT ACTUAL OPERATION WOULD BE HANDLED BY S.O.E. UNDER ORDERS GRP. MUT. C.O.S. B. THERE IS NO QUESTION OF S.O.E. RELINQUISHING CONTROL. IT COULD BE ARRANGED THAT P.U.D. REPRESENTATIVE GO OVER TO DISCUSS GENERAL PLANS WITH YOU. TP 0710 29/5/42 New...., fi  LOCAL NO 623 PRIVATE CIPHER TELEGRAM DESPATCHED TO NEW YORK  2.6.42. 2079  G FROM AD/U  YOUR TELEGRAM 946 of 21ST MAY  WE ARE VERY INTERESTED IN SMALL PISTOLS SCHEME BUT CONSIDER PREMATURE FOR P.W.D. REPRESENTATIVE TO COME OVER NOW. WHEN WE HAVE REACHED DETAILED PLANNING STAGE IE WILL RE-OPEN QUESTION OF VISIT.  TP EYW 2025 2.6.42. ORIGIN AD/U, LOCAL FR 124 CYPHER TELEGRAM FROM NEW YORK DESP 1221 6.6.42.  04505 2FD OF THIS NO RECD 1055 6.6.42.  YOUR TELEGRATvl 61 MAY 31ST. G148 NOW IN RIO DE JANERIHO AND TELEGRAPHS AS FOLLOWS.  A.  I AM AFRAID I DREW A BLANK IN ASUNCION. POLITICAL SITUATION IS DOMINATED BY MILITARY AND MOST UNCERTAIN. American ambassador is fawning on government high may NOT LAST ANOTHER WEEK. BUT I CANNOT CONCEIVE OF MILITARY SETTING UP DEUTSCHNATIONAL REGIME FRANKLY HOSTILE TO PAN AMERICAN IDEALS UNDER EXISTING CIR CUMSTANCES. B. DANGER IS EVIDENTLY FROM GERMAN ELEMENTS WHO WOULD RISE TOGETHER WITH THEIR CO-NATIONALS IN SOUTHERN BRAZIL AND ELSEWHERE TO SAY NOTHING OF JAPANESE IN ORDER TO INTERFERE AS FAR AS POSSIBLE WITH LATIN AMERICAN ECONOMIC CONTRIBUTION TO OUR WAR EFFORT. C. I DONOT SEE THAT WE CAN SET UP ANY ORGANIZE ON IN PARAGUAY CAPABLE OF CHECKING SUCH INTERFERENCE NEITHER IS THERE ANY LOCAL ORGANIZATION THAT I KNOW OF WE CAN TAP FOR ASSISTANCE AS IN CASE OF ARGENTINE. D. IMPORTANCE OF PARAGUAY IS IN \NY CASE OUTSTANDING IN VIRTUE OF ITS CENTRAL POSITION. NOT ECONOMIC. WHAT WE NEED THERE IS GOOD INTELLIGENCE SERVICE AND I TRUST THAT AS BEEN MET ALREADY ESTABLISHED BY S I S. TELEGRAM ENDS. TP AT 1326 6.5.42. J1MG, u/us/1798 26.5.42.  To AD/U From U  ACTIVITY PICTURES  The following has been reported to me by G.T.l.  In November G put forward a scheme for the production of activity pictures in Canada for dissemination in Latin and North America. This was agreed to in London subject to the approval of the produced article by London and this decision was conveyed to Major Maschwitz who went back together with an expert photographer to set up the S.O. machinery. While this was in the course of preparation G1 decided -in view of America's entry into the war and the cessation of our activities in North America -to drop this type of activity.  G.T. attached so much importanceto this activity that he offered to raise the necessary funds himself in Canada in order to carry it on. 'G' then said that if Col. Donovan'.s organisation was prepared to come into partnership with us and take responsibility for the production of these pictures he would be prepared to reconsider the situation. G.T. then put the proposal to Taylor Stanley and Barnes who are three of the top people of Donovan's F.I.S. side. These three were enthu siastic and perfectly willing to co-operate. A committee was formed consisting of these three G.T.l. and G.101 who were to supervise the production which would take place in Canada. I understand the type of subject which it is proposed to produce is as follows  1 Pictures alleged to have been taken by a Polish woman in a brothel in Poland into which she had been forced by the Germans  2 Pictures showing the ill-treatment and degradation of the Jews in Poland  3 Starvation scenes and prison scenes in Greece  4 Pictures of execution scenes in Poland and elsewhere. The distribution of these pictures was obviously the crux of the matter and we would be asked to help in the distribution of the film say from Lisbon Scandinavia and elsewhere.  G.T. states that 'G' himself is satisfied that this should be allowed to proceed and asked for our views., 'U/us/1799 26.5.42.  To AD/U From U.  Reference the attached record of a conversation with G.T. there are obvious points of high principle involved.  I also found out in conversation that while the three members of G.50 0001s organisation were in enthusiastic agreement they had not consulted Sherwood the head of the F.I.S. or Donovan. This seems to me an obviously very dangerous position as if an exposure occurred in North America Donovan could completely disown any arrangement we might have made.  I am not at all clear as to the value of this type of activity and I feel that if the Americans want this sort of thing to ingress their own people they should produce it themselves and we should not in any way be connected with it. If however it is thought that M.o.I. think as I have some reason to believe they might that such stuff would be useful in South America there is some reason why we should continue with it though I am doubtful if the  M.o.I. would agree to use faked material of this sort. It seems to me that we should discuss this with G when he comes over as I have a feeling that he is not fully aware of the facts that I have given., lyir  LOCAL NR. 553 CIPHER TELEGRAM DESPATCHED TO NSl YORK. '  NO. 2063. 31.5.- FOLLOWING FOR G FROM GT.l. A. IMMEDIATELY ON ARRIVAL I DISCUSSED .STATION M AND ACTIVITY PICTURES PROJECT WITH AD/U. B. AD/U NOW INFORMS ME THAT CD WISHES TO POSTPONE DECISION ON THESE UNTIL YOUR VISIT. C. OPINION HERE IS THAT AMERICAN COLLABOPAT ON ACTIVITY PICTURES CAN NOT REPEAT NOT BE REGARDED AS ADEQUATE WITHOUT EITHER G.50.000 OR G.50.100 BEING MAM THEI-0 PARTICIPATION. I TOLD AD/U THAT .E WOULD HAVE NO OBJECTION TO G.50.100 KNOWING BUT G.50.000 3 SECURITY WEAKNESS RULED HIM OUT. D. THERE ARE NO REPEAT NO FUNDAMENTAL'OBJECTIONS TO STATION M PROJECT BUT SUCH LARGE SCALE ISSUES ARE INVOLVED THAT IMMEDIATE DECISION IS THOUGHT UNWISE. E. AS A RESULT I AM NOT REPEAT NOT PURSUING ENQUIRIES FOR.- PERSONNEL. F. RETURN ACCOMMODATION FOR JUNE FIFTH NOT CERTAIN BUT CHANCES ARE GOOD. TP AT 0326 31.5.42. JL ORIGIN U.,  i -  LOCAL NO 922.' CIPHER TELEGRAM RECEIYED FROM NEW YORK . DESP. 1406 1.6.42. 99201 RBCD 2335 1.6.42. G.T.l. FROM G. YOUR TELEGRAM 63 MAY 31sT. YOUR PARAGRAPH C. COULD NOT REPEAT NOT CONSIDER EXPANDED JOINT COOPERATION WITH STATION M. WITHOUT ffJLL KNOWLEDGE AND APPROVAL OF G.50.000. CANNOT UNDERSTAND REFERENCE TO G.50.000 SECURITY WEAKNESS THERE WOULD BE NO QUESTION OF ANY LEAKAGE FROM THAT SOURCE IF HE BE INFORMED WITH THIS NECESSITY FOR SECRECY'THERE IS CONSIDERATION APPLYING TO PROJECT. TP AT t 08.16 2.6.42. J.C., U/US/1800 26.5.42. To AD/U. Fromi U.  G-.T. also raised the broad question of Station 'M .  Station MI was set up in Canada and is in a position to produce any type of paper printing or forgery required. Its use has been discussed with the G.50 000 organisation who in theory are very keen to use this weapon but in practice -like most of us -have no concrete suggestions to make of the method by which it should be used.  G.T. asked if we had anybody here who specialised in this type of work and I replied that any work of this sort would be initiated by the Country Section concerned and in occupied territories in conjunction with P.W.E.   I think that the Americans loo upon it as an attractive toy but I personally feel that while it would be useful to keep the facilities available it is not possible to set out on a deliberate career of wide-scale forgery. Opportunities may occur from time to time whereby a specific operation can be carried out.  I do not know if you would like to raise the question of the utility of Station M at the Directors Meeting and whether we should give any assistance or directive to the Americans as to the way in which operations of this nature would assist us. I feel it very doubtful that anything of this sort could be done., 4th June 1942.  MINUTES OF A MEETING HELD IK AD/Z S OFFICE TO DISCUSS T'-flC QTTTUnTION or6eneral Liaison t3et een s.o.e. London and s.o.u.y. REGAPb to MANUFACTURE STORING & SHIPPING OF DEVICES.  The following were present t   AD/S AD/Z.l.  G.T.l. AD/U. S.  1 It-was decided that liaison in respect of toys devices between our two organisations should be done direct with G.T.l and E. Wireless equip ment is to be dealt with by B/Y Section. As and when ifi forwards information to G.T.l he will then decide what information should be passed on to G.50 000. S.O.E. London will not deal direct with any Americans either in Great Britain or U.S.A. Action. 2 Liaison with Commandos. on his return to New York c.T.r. G.T.l.will pursue enquiries in regard to Commando training and will advise London. Action. 3 It was laid down that we should advise the Ministry G.T.l. of Supply as to the address of our office in the United States i.e. Director of Security Co ordination Room 3553 630 Fifth Avenue New York City and also arrangements made between S.O.E. and G.50 000's organisation in respect of supplies. E undertook to see that the Ministry of Supply advise the British Purchasing Commission over there and G.T.l will also contact them so that the whole matter is tied up. Action. 4 It was suggested by G.T.l that a joint committee U T.1. consisting of G.50 000 s representatives and G s representatives should be formed so as to co-ordinate supplies coming from North America. G.T.l undertook to discuss t his with G and he will advise us.  5 Plastic Explosive. G.T.l and E visited Dr. Armit of the Ministry of Supply on the 30th May to discuss the question as to whether G.O.E. London or Canada would be able to obtain supplies of Plastic manufactured In Canada. In brief it was laid down that London would be responsible for the allocation to British Forces of all the Plastic Explosive made in England and Canada and conse quently should we require supplies then the indent should go to the Ear office and in turn they will pass it on to Dr. Armit who would arrange alloca tion. G.T.l however voiced the opinion that the Canadian authorities wish to allocate their own supplies but Dr. Arnxit stated that he would be responsible and not Canada. should G.T.l however require merely a few hundred lbs. for training purposes he would no doubt be able to draw this locally from the Canadian manufacturers. Action 6 Subject to security it was thought desirable that G.T.1 both sides should pool their production and, Action G.t.I  Action  G.T.l  Action  0.7.17  Action. &T /  Action.  E. Action. E .   9   -2   conseouently both America and England should be informed of their respective production possibil ities. It was agreed therefore that we will send our figures to G.T.l who in turn trill obtain the American figures and forward them to us. Tfhen this information has been exchanged we can decide as to what devices will be manufactured in each country.   7 G.T.l asked whether trained personnel who have had operational experiences could pay visits from time to time. it the moment he pointed out that It Is not necessary but he envisaged t at it would be most desirable at some future date.  P Wireless. G.T.l pointed out that there existed an enormous production field in America and was of the opinion that we should send a fully trained man out to act as adviser on manufacture. a'D/7 pointed out that we could not spare trained men from -Station IT so C.T.J stated that flea York could very easily take on a first class man and he would then send him over here for training so that he could later return to take over this work.  9 Finance. In oagland supplies of toys and devices etc. are paid for out of sr Office funds and the-question arises as to hat the procedure will be in regard to payment of stores supplied to us by the Americans and vice versa. As we do not pay for supplies we will not charge the Americans and S.Q.T.T. will approach G.5Q Oho with a request for him to approach his Finance Officer to see whether similar arrasgmorits can be made at.his end. In the meanwhile l after diseussion/3/STN will inform N.G.O. F.A. that we shall be supplying the Americans with stores in future.   10 Shipping goods ex Canada and America. G.T.l. will undertake to make suitable arrangements and will advise A/DU as to the outcome.  .11 It was suggested that there should be a permanent Liaison Officer dealing with the general question of supplies of toys and devices who should visit the U.S.a. at periodic intervals. AD/2 will endeavour to find such a man. .   12 Inorder to ensure that there is no loss of time it was decided that G.T.l. and I should be in direct telegraphic communication.  13 A monthly letter is pro ueed by Station XII which is then passed to AD/f.l and after vetting same forwards it to G.50.000. AD/ .1 will now pass this letter on to s who i ill forward it direct to G.T 1. It is also understood that 1 will send to G.T.l copies of drawings and literature which he considers is of interest.  14 Samples of made-up Gharges. G.T.l requested that a ifull rans e of dummy samples together with liter ature should be forwarded to rf.T.S.103. 1 Undertook to see that they would be sent., 4 ihiA  GTi/oH/1840. 5.6.42. To AD/U. Copy for G. -held for arrival From G.T.l.  Copy for M. in London I have noted the memoranda passing between you and M as well as the telegram sent 'G1 in reference to S.T.S.103. I hope the following facts and opinions will be helpful when further discus sion takes place.  1. The School has admirably served three purposes a It has trained a considerable number of S.O.IT.Y officials and G-land agents.  b It was almost the only means by which the Q1 organisation could have been persuaded to open similar schools and its facilities speeded this development by many months. It also was of inestimable value in developing liaison not only with 'Q but F.B.I. as well. The'School officers by ability and tact did a splendid job in furthering Anglo-American relations.  c It enabled S.O.N.Y. to establish the main station of its communications network with absolute security and also to train W/T operators. Now with regard to the future   a Almost all S.O.N.Y. officials and important agents have now been trained and further training requirements depend on an extension of activities of the type envisaged in   G s telegram 47 -50 inclusive. With any such develop ment a reasonable possibility it would seem desirable to postpone a 11close-down decision.  b It is quite true that Q schools are in operation but they lack trained instructors and I foresee the likelihood of Col. G.H. Williams realising this when he completes his present mission and that as a consequence he will ask for additional help. Furthermore other U.S. bodies such as F.B.I. are apt to request the use of our facili ties and we should be able to serve them.  c The W/T network has every chance of being a large-scale operation. A transmitter house has been erected at S .T.S.103 and in it will be two transmitters 10 k.w. and 2 k.w. standby as well as accommodation for four operators. If the proposed receiving and interception operation develops we may need to build a house and quarters however if the school proper is closed some of the present buildings could be used for this purpose . By August 1st the school vail have trained some 25 W/T operators. Regardless of the future the W/T operation has already proceeded so far that while training may cease the property must be maintained. 2. The decision may be to maintain S.T.S. 103 'as is' for the moment. However the decision may be to close down training and maintain only the W/T operation. In this event personnel changes will be necessary. Obviously the decisions involved are for 'M but my views thereon may be helpful. The Adjutant Capt. Bushel is a highly competent officer and quite capable of acting as 0.0. should G.T.2 and G.T.3 be brought back to the U.K. Oapt. James Adams R.O.S. is doing a most satisfactory job and I know that G.142 desires not only to keep him in charge of the technical phases of the operation but to extend his responsibili ties as the network grows provided 1M' is agreeable. Capt. Adams would /, -2   would be fixLly competent to act as 2 i/c to Oapt. Bushel. Oapt. F.S. Milner will no longer be necessary if the school is closed but I should point out that Ool. Williams would welcome his services on a temporary basis having already spoken to me twice on this subject.  3. On the basis of the school closing down O.R. personnel could be treated as follows - The S.M. and sergeant instructors including W/T could be returned to U.K.  Present staff of about 30 could be substantially reduced.  4. Finally there are in my judgment most important security and policy reasons for keeping at least a part of the operation in existence. S.T.S. 103 is the only secure place we have in  1-land for highly secret stores. While in London I have asked for many samples of various stores devices camouflage etc. Such could not possibly be sent to the U.S. without serious risk of exposure and we are fortunate in having such arrangements with the Canadian authorities that goods of this kind are admitted without any examination or detailed customs entry., OTi/cjj/1854. 8.6.42.  To' U. Copy to i&/Z From G.T.l In answer to your general query concerning the present status of the wireless developments at S.T.8.103 I give you the following facts   1 There has been erected at 8.T.S.103 8.T.8 103 layout in possession of MT a transmitter house approxi mately 45 x 23 ft. in size. This house will hold one 10 k.w. transmitter and fox standby use one 2 k.w. transmitter which has already been installed and I think is in operation. The transmitter house has in addition to the space for the transmit ters a modest but adequate store-room and sleeping and toilet facilities for 4 operators.  2 v/hen I left Canada the iignals Officer at 8 T. 8 103 who is in general charge of the installation under the direction of 0.142 waa erecting aerials which were beamed at the tl.K  3 i.T. .103 has already trained approximately 18 operators. These operators were recruited in Canada and have been passed out as fully competent by the Signals Officer. They have been ham operators for many years and all are competent to build install and operate wireless equipment of almost any size. In addition to these it is intended to recruit another 10 or 12 operators and give them the same kind of training which con sists of security weapons unarmed combat map reading and of course a general refresher on all phases of //T work with parti cular emphasis on interception codes and ciphers and the little tricks of 5.0. and 8.1.8. secret operations.  4 Purpose of the operators is threefold a to operate the Station at S.T.8.103  b to carry on Interception work  c if and when final plans are developed to move into  Latin America and operate our secret stations which  may be cloaked under Legation or Embassy cover to do  interception work in these localities and to tr4ain  local agents.   5 It ms the intention to do all cipher work in the Hew York office with messages being fed to and fro on the T.K. secret wire connecting 3.G.H.Y. and Ottawa a loop being thrown into 8.T.8 103 which is practically on the direct line between the two points.  6 It is my understanding that O.T.S.IOJ i/T Station is to be the main line station of a possible Western hemispheric wireless group. The final details of this group have not been established and I am afraid that any indication of the line it 'Is to follow would have to come from G.142 because as is obvious many changes may have taken place since 1 left New York.  7 It is my understanding that this operation as far as capital cost is concerned is a 3ointment between 8.0. and 3 1 3 and that operating costs will be decided by usage as between the two organisations.  8 There has been some discussion between Ab/U and M concerning the possible cloying down of S.T.S 103. In a memorandum to AD/f I pointed out that the f/T development at S.T.8.IO3 has already advanced so far that while the School may be closed down it seems that the n/T operation could not be and that some provision for its maintenance must be made.  9 //, 2   9 Xou asked me specifically concerning reception on this side and transmission from here to 3.T.S.IO3. 1 regret to say that 1 am completely Ignorant oh this stage of the operation and can give you no advice., MT/856  6th June 1942  To -M  Prom -MI  Visit of Gr and G-.50000  Reference MS/MX/57/MG dated 6.6.42.  Prom IvIT Section point of view the chief item for discussion is the future of S.T.S.103 and the Instructors and staff there.  I am strongly in favour of closing the school and re-calling the British Instruction staff within the near future for the following reasons  1. I consider that we have now given all the help which S.T.S.103 can provide to G.50000's organisation. 2. Should G.50000 require further Instructors to be trained they would presumably be specialist Instructors who should receive more thorough training than can be given at S.T.S.103. They should therefore be sent to England for training here at the proper school. 3. Col. Garland-Williams told me when I was in the United States that he would be sending no further parties to S.T.S.103 in any case. 4. I understand that no furtherJL . operators or officers will be trained at S.T.S.103 for oorroparSticm in the western hemisphere. It has been ruled that Post-occupational work in Canada comes under the control of the Army and not S.O. and therefore there will presumably be no requirements for training Canadian personnel.  5. It would not appear that the training of as P.B.I. Canadian- Mounted Police and the P.W.D. are a proper commitment for this Section. As to the disposal of the training staff I suggest that at the conclusion of the present course all Instructors should be re-called to England with the exception of Maj. Brooker who should be permitted to remain for one or at the most two months more tp assist Col. Garland-Williams.  As the communication station at Toronto seemsto be much more an S.J.S. than an S.O responsibility and as now we also require Signal Instructors very urgently in this country I do not consider that Capt. Adams should remain in Canada.  Should G. require to use the present school Other Rank Adminis trative Staff or use at the Wireless Station I see no objection from the point of view of this section nor is there any objection to the retention of the present Adjutant Capt. Bushel with them., ADU/AMS/29 l6th May 1942.  To O.D. From AD/U.  Oo-operation with 11Q11 In South America  There is no doubt that in theory the desirability of using  C to obtain all our intelligence for us is sound. The reasons are so obvious that they do not need'recapitulation.  In practice however there are many difficulties. The main one is that while we are agreed that it is desirable and  0 here are also in agreement our New York office would most undoubtedly say that the O organisation south of the Orinoco is quite incapable of doing our intelligence work. I quote from a report to G from G.100 dated February l8th   For the time being the principal task would appear to be the collection of intelligence. .In view of the fact that in Argentina ' Chile Bolivia and Peru S.I.S. have no intelligence organisation which is worthy of the name the task of providing this intelligence will naturally fall upon the various 8.0. representatives.  In any case however 8.0. intelligence would appear of necessity to be more all-embracing than 8.I.S. intelligence since S.I.S. in those countries do not in a general way consider that they are concerned with political intelligence and appear to confine themselves primarily to what may be called police intelligence i.e. dealing with personalities rather than movements and tendencies.11  It does not seem likely that we shall persuade-G by cable that 0 is in fact capable of doing this work and the only practical solution is to let C persuade him when he comes over here. I do not think that there is any doubt that the 0 organisation will need a great deal of strengthening before it is in a position to render us the service that we shall want.  The financial provisions in s draft telegram were entirely his idea and are ridiculous. Any financial readjust ment that might be necessary would have of course to be arranged here., MOST SECRET  ADU/AMS/25. 13th May 1942.  To O.D. From AD/U.  The attached proposed telegram drafted Toy S.I.S ree-arding jthe jorganisation in South America was handed to us by  . It was agreed at the time that as G was  probably coming to this country no action should be taken until  his arrival and after discussion with him.  In view of your recent talks about co-operation with S.I.S. you may wish to take this matter up yourself., A.C.S.S. C.S.3. I have had several talks with Major Chapman Walker the  S.O.E. man who runs South America and I hope they will be prepared to agree to a telegram on the lines attached. I therefore propose to send this over to Chapman Walker for his concurrence but before doing so I should naturally like to get approval of A.C.S.S. and C.S.S.  Section G.2. 23rd April 1942.  G.2. I agree -difficulty is I fear that 48 in his dual capacity will not agree and may obstruct.  C.D. 25/4, / To Major Chapman Walker From  S.O.E. ' S.I.S.  Organisation in South America  In view of our recent conversations and the conversations at lunch yesterday with other members of your organisation I was left with the impression that S.O.E. wishes to continue to control their South American organisations through 48000.    I  I am wondering whether you would agree to our both sending a telegram to our representatives in South America on the following lines -   IIThe following instructions to their representatives in South America have been agreed on by S.I.S . and S.O.E. headquarters.   A. S.I.S. is responsible for obtaining all intelligence including intelligence required by S.O.E.   B. If any area is insufficiently covered for the requirements of S.O.E. their local representative will ask S.I.S. to strengthen the organisation where required and if necessary indicate suitable persons for agents. Such agents should be contacted by S.I.S. organisation and if considered suitable for employment should be engaged and paid out of S.O.E. funds if agents are employed principally on collecting their intelligence.  0. Any S.O.E. intelligence service at present in being in South America should be turned over to the local S.I.S.man who should continue to employ the agents if considered suitable  S.O.E. providing the funds.  D Anyqperation which may be carried'out by S.O.E. in future should be communicated by the S.O.E. representative con   1 ducting the operation to the S.I.S. representative in the area in order that the latter may take steps to safeguard the intelli gence organisation either lay withdrawing his agents temporarily from the area or by any other suitable means.  Do you think your department would agree to sending a similar telegram to your local representatives and to 48OOO who controls them You will probably readily agree that it is not much use our sending a telegram unless you send one also and 48OOO must be told all the general principles., 2   operatore in the various countries. This was to be a joint 8.0 and 0. venture. We then asked for financial details and whether S.O. was committed New York replied that 3.0. was not in any way committed but that it was felt that we should bear a fair proportion of the cost. We replied agreeing and asking what proportion New York considered 8.0. should carry. They replied 50 of capital cost.  All the figures that are available at the moment are as follows  Capital cost  3 Main line Stations at 20 000 60 000 300 Suitcase Bets at l60 as ZfigpOO  130 000  Running costs  3 Main line Stations at 600 per month 1.800 p.month  30 British nationals in field at 160 per month -4.800 6 600 New York also anticipate employing an unknown number of  foreign nationals in the field. \  The position is very undetermined at the moment and I feel that we should discuss it with 'O' to settle the ' following points  1. Is it intended to use the network for routine commu nications as soon as set up or only in case of emergency. 2. Is it intended to use the Toronto Station for communication with S.O. London 3. Whether 0 has been consulted in regard to our proposed 50 capital liability. 4. To obtain a detailed plan of the layout as quickly as we can. See attached memorandum GTl/CU/1854 from G. T.l. to U. 9. S.O. Activities in Latin America. This is a self-evident question for discussion and is only added to this agenda as a reminder. 10. Liaison with S.O.N.Y in regard to manufacture storing and shipping of devices. This was the subject of a meeting between AD/Z. AB/Z.l AB/U G.T.l.and B. Minutes of the meeting are attached., v ireless network in Latin Aaerioa. This has been -cue  '/ subject of several cables. We enquired what the position was in April and were informed that 18 operators were in course of training. These men were to be used to set lip main line stations at Toronto and Jamaica with possibly a third located in South America aftd also to train local  i - operators /, FII /ftj/3020. 9th June 1942.  Toi AD/U. Copy to A. . Froms b/FIK.  VISIT OF G. & 8.50.QCO.  With reference to Al/XX/2152 dated 5th June 1942 I should like to have a fairly long chat say one hour with G. to discuss the Kew York accounts and finances in general and with particular referenca to apportionaent of expenses between C and ourselves the joint W/T Scheme with C the future of the Training School and financial adjustments with G.50 000., SOE/622 ' A ' s TO ACSS ONLY CIPHER TELEQRAM RECEIVED FROM NEW YORK DHLSP 1806 9/6/42 RECD.CI245 10/6/42 10409 YOUR TELEQRAM 141 JUNE 8TH. A. YOUR PAQR4RAPH Bo COURIER S A PERUVIAN WHO HA-5 F ONQ BEEN IN NAZI PAYo ON THIS OCCASION HE WAS SENT FROM LIMA WITH MESSAQE FOR QUERRERQ LA PAX KEPT WAITING SOME DAYS IN LA PAX AND THEN QIVEN DOCUMENT TO DELIVER TO EPH M -fc B. Q 5100 HAS A PERUVIAN NAZI SYMPATHISER CONTACT WHO IS WANTED BY POLICE ON A CRIMINAL CHARQE. THROUQH HIS HOLD ON THIS MAN HE HAS LEARNT COURSER S PLANS AND HAD A WATCH MAINTAINED ON BOLIVIA PERUVIAN FRONTIER ALSO ON ALL MEANKF TRANSPORT OUT OF AREQUIPA. C. COURIER TOOK QREAT PRECAUTIONS AND SLIPPED THROUQH MET BUT WAS FINALLY CONTACTED APPROACH INQ LIMA ON RETURN JOURNEYo Q 5100sS AQENT THERE THREATENED HIM WiTH VIOLENCE UNLESS HE ACCEPTED BRIBE FOR LOAN OF MESSAQE MY IMMEDIATELY FOLLOW INQ TELEQRAM X CQRP/MUTo SPELLJNQ 3 LETTERS TP 0843 ' 10/6/42 WN ., , SU .G .RY OF AGR5EffiMT  between  BRITISH S.O.5. and AIvERICAH S O.  The following io a fairly full summary of the agreement reached in the course of discussions between officers of the British S.O.E. and the American S.0 between the 16th and 22nd June 1942.  This agreement was confirmed by Sir Charles Hanibro on the one side and Colonel Donovan on the other on the under standing that it would be submitted by the former to the British Chiefs of Staff and the Foreign Office and by the latter to the American Chiefs of Staff at the State Department for their approval.  The principles on which this Agreement are based are -as followss   1. Co-operation at Headquarters London/Washington The object of such co-operation is to achieve a common policy and to avoid crossing of lines in regard either to policy or to the supply of materials. For this purpose close liaison between headquarters is essential.  This liaison will be effected by a British liaison section working alongside Colonel Donovan's headquarters in Washington and a similar American liaison section working alongside S.O.E. Headquarters London. The duties of this liaison section would bo  a To represent the views of their respective headquarters on all policy matters so that a common policy for every theatre can be decided on.  b To discuss with the headquarters to which they have been accredited. cases of dispute in the field which have been .referred to that headquarters.  c To exchange information and to keep thoir headquarters fully informed of matters of interest.  d To qor-ordinate the production demand and supply of equipment from British and U.S. sources.  e To exchange both operational and technical in telligence and information on methods of training.  Such a liaison section might consist of one head liaison officer v/ho would bo a high level roprosentative charged with executive functions supported by requisite staff., f  2  2. CO-OPlORATION IN THS FIELD It i essential to avoid the situation where there will ho two completely independent organisations working in the field with all the consequent dangers of crossing of lines competition for agents and material etc. and inviting attempts hy foreign governments or groups with whom both organisations would ho dealing to play one off against the other.  In some cases the problem will ho dealt with by assigning a given region exclusively cither to the American or British organisation the organisation which agrees to stay out being represented at the most only by a liaison officer and a small staff.  There will however bo very few of these simple cases and in most areas the position will be that whilst an area is pre dominantly a British or American sphere of influence both countries will have some interests inside it and will need to establish some sort of representation and possibly a system of agents..  It is agreed that the general principles to be adopted in such cases should be  a Each area should be defined as being cither a British or American area.   To bo inserted at the request of the Foreign Office It is understood that in allocating an area predominantly cither to the British or American organisation a main consideration will bo tho system of military command pre vailing in the area in question. Thus normally where the local command is American tho area will -unless some special over-riding consideration applies -be allocated to American S.O.. whore tho command is British the allocation will.be to tho British S.O.E.  It is further understood that such allocation will be re viewed in the light of any development in the military situation thus a change in command from American to British or vice versa will be followed by a corresponding change in tho allocation of tho area.  b Inside a British area it will be agreed that the control and direction should be British and that the policy should bo laid down and all instructions to the Mission or Missions in that area should be issued from London. In an American area the same procedure would apply as regards Washington.  c In the field in a British area there would be a British Mission the head of which would be Controller for the whole area and who would look for his direction and instructions to London If the Americans so wished there could be an American Mission in the same territory which would have its own headquarters its own stations and its own agents but tho American Mission and its head at those headquarters would work under the direction and control of the British con troller. The hoad of tho American Mission could report direct to Washington on any matter he wished with a copy to the American liaison mission in London but ho would receive his instructions from London and through'the British controller and would only act on communications received direct from Washington with the agreement and consent of the British controller. In an American territory tho same principle would apply with the roles reversed.  d In the event of a difference of opinion arising botxTOon tho British or American controller and tho head of the British, -3  or American Mission inside his territory which could not  he settled locally the issue would he referred to London or Washington respectively and it would he the responsi   hility of the headquarters in question to settle it with the liaison mission attached to itt  Even these rather general principles may not ho able to he applied strictly in all eases and it may he nec essary to make exceptions in certain countries to meet special requirements. y  It was agreed that the following areas could he allocated in accordance with the foregoing principles without raising any vory serious problems.  1. INDIA It was agreed that India should he regarded as a British area where all operations would he carried out by the British Mission with control being exercised from London. The American S.O. would have the right to send out a liaison mission to he attached to the British Mission for liaison purposes hut not for operational purposes.  2. CHINA It was agreed that this area of which the headquarters would he at Chungking and which cover the whole of China in cluding Japanese-occupied China Manchuria and Korea should he regarded as an American sphere of influence. The American Mission would he established at Chungking and would direct all S.O. activities in this area. It would ho controlled from Washington. The existing British Mission at Chungking would he reduced and would he turned'into a liaison mission attached to the American Mission. The British liaison mission in addition to its liaison duties would render any assistance which it could to the American Mission hut only at the latter s request and under the letter s control.  3. AUSTRALIA It was agreed that British S.O.E. would have no res ponsibility for and would take no action in the area covered by General MacArthur's Command and that of the American Naval Command in the South Western Pacific. This area would he considered as covering New Guinea and the islands of the Bast Indian archipelago up to and including Java and Borneo. It would he for the American S.O. to make its own arrangements with the I.S.D. which already exists in Australia under General MacArthur's control. British S.O.E. would continue to give any assistance asked for to this Mission.  1 . To ho inserted at the request of the Foreign Office  BURMA  It was agreed that Burma should ho a British area hut that American S.O. should have the right to work into it as convenient from Chinn.  5. SIAM. INDO-CHINA. MALAYA AND SUMATRA It was agreed that those areas should he regarded as a no-man's-lnnd which could ho worked into os convenient by the British S.O.E. Mission in India the American S.O. Mission in China and I.S.D. in Australia. Line crossing inside this, -k   nrcn would hnvc to to nvoidcd Toy close Unison 1 Gtwoon those  three missions.  6. EAST AFRICA It was agreed that the area covered Toy the British S.O.E. Mission which already exists with its headquarters at Durban charged with working into Madagascar and Portuguese East Africa should ho regarded as a British area. American S.O would have the right to have a liaison mission attached to  the British Mission at Durban.  7. WEST AFRICA -PRAVi'EST and NEUGOLS Whilst it was agreed that the area covered by these two existing British S.O.E. Missions -namely the West African colonies from the southern boundary of Morocco to the boundary of South West Africa with Portuguese West Africa -should for the time being bo regarded as predominantly a British sphere it was recognised that the American S.O. had a very definite interest in this area since if any military action on a larg scale were to be undertaken by the United Nations in West Africa such action would predominantly be the responsibility of the American military authorities. The American S.O. therefore consider that they must place themselves in a position to be able to carry out S.O. services for the American Command if such a situation should arise. The following procedure was accordingly agreed upon.  American S.O. would establish Missions corresponding to our Prawcst and Neucols Missions. The programme of these American Missions would be worked out in as much detail as possible between Washington and London. Copies of this agreed programme would then be sent to the Heads of the American Missions and the Heads of the British Missions with clear instructions in both cases that the execution of this programme by the American Missions would be discussed step by step with the Hoads of the British Missions and no action taken until agree- ment had been reached with them. If such agreement could not bo arrived at the point at issue would be referred to headquarters to be settled between London anc Washington and until decision was given no action would be taken by the American Missions. It was con templated that the programme which would be worked out between London and Washington for these American Missions would be essentially preparatory in character consisting of the placing of American representatives at appropriate points the establishment of dumps of materials the collection of information and operational intelligence and the working out of plans against appropriate targets.  It was agreed that as had already boon arranged with the Minister Resident the situation in West Africa would as regards him be analagous to that existing in Cairo and that the Head of the British Mission in West Africa would act as the link between any American Mission and the Minister Resident putting up-to the latter the requirements of the American Mission and convoying to them the decisions of the Minister Resident  8. ATLANTIC ISLANDS It was agreed that those islands comprising the Azores Madeira the Canaries and the Cape Verde Islands should bo regarded as an American sphere and operated by an American Mission controlled from Washington. The British S.O.E. would have the right to attach liaison officers to the AmericanA., -5     ...... . ..  organisation.  9. FINLAND It was'agreed that Finland should.he regarded ns an American sphere and that the British S.O.E. should place all facilities and contacts useful for this country at the disposal of their American collcnguesv  1. RUSSIA-   S.O.E. having explained the position regarding their liaison mission in Moscow and their agreement with the  N.K.V.D. that neither party would carry out any operations in the territory of the other except Toy mutual arrangement it was agreed that as the American S.O. had no intention for the present at least of dealing with Russia there was no need to work out any arrangements for collohoration for this area ' A more detailed agreement was come to in regard to the following areas which present somov/hat complicated problems.  1. BALKANS and THE MIDDLE EAST It was agreed .that in view of the fact that all Military Commands in this area were British Commands that the principal political authority was the British Minister of State at Cairo'and that the whole of the territory other than Turkey -within which and from which operations could take place or he based -was wholly or partially under British military occupation the area at present covered by the British  S.O.E. with its headquarters at Cairo should be regarded as predominantly a British area. At the same time it was appreciated that there were many ways in which the American S.O. could be of great assistance in this area It could call upon resources in regard to equipment materials and possibly personnel which were not available to the British S.O.E. and in certain area -for example Turkey and Iran - American personnel could in some respects operate more easily than British personnel. It was accordingly agreed that the set-up should be as foHiowa -   The controller of the existing British S.O.E. Mission would be regarded as being in charge of all S.O.E. operations in that area and would be responsible for all S.O.E. activity to the local authorities -particularly the S.O. E. Sub-Committee of the Minister of State's. War Council -and to headquarters in London. An Amorican S.O. Mission should be set up in Cairo with the.object of providing such assistance as it could to the British S.O.E. and of contributing to the British  S.O.E. services which would only be available from the American side. The form and extent of the organisation of tho Ameriqan Mission and also the scope and character ' of its activities -would be discussed and settled by tho Head of the American Mission with the British Controller under whom he would be   working. In the event -of failure to reach agreement the issue would be referred to headquarters to be settled between London and Washington and in the meantime the views of the Controller would prevail. The Head of the American.Mission would communicate direct with Washington on any matter ho pleased but it would bo clearly laid down that as regards any action the American Mission would look to the Controller for direction and instructions and would take no action except with,    6  i.ls approvol.  With regard to ouch cor.raunicntions hetv/een Washington and the Head of the /.merican Mission in Cairo it was agreed that all such telegrams -whether originating from Washington or Cairo -should he repeated to the American Mission attached to S.O.E. London. It was also agreed that it v/ould he the responsibility of the American Mission in London to keep British S.O.E. informed as to the content of all such messages which/'affect British interests. It was agreed that if the American Mission set up their own War Station in Cairo it would he used only for coramunicatione with Washington as the War Station belonging to S.O.E Mid-East is already adequate for handling all communications with agents in the field.  The substantial effect of this arrangement would be that there would be a single S.O.E. machine in the area at the head of which would be the present Controller but that under him there would be two organisations namely the existing British S.O.E. organisation covering the whole area of the Mission and a small American organisation which would be fitted by the Controller into the general programme wherever it could help.  In regard to the question of supplies of equipment from America to S.O.E. Mid-East it was pointed out that such equipment comes under two categories namely  a Service equipment including aircraft naval craft arms ammunition medical stores building materials transport parnchutos containers clothing and field telephones and  b Non-Sorvicc specialised equipment including explosives sabotage devices W/T sets War Station and broadcasting equipment otc.  With regard to the former it was pointed out. that S.O.E. is the British Government department created for waging subversive warfare but that the C-in-C Mid-East is responsible for all operations in that thoatro of war. S.O.E. plans A must therefore conform to C-in-C's operational requirements and to the strategic requirements of the Chiefs of Staff. . Thoy arc therefore submitted to G-in-C for his concurrence and I in carrying them out S.O.E. arc acting ns his agents.  It was remarked that this machinery has boon set up to enable the combined Chiofs of Staff to pool the resources of the United States and Groat Britain and allocate them to the various theatres of war having regard also to transport facilities. It was accordingly agreed that it will therefore be impossible for S.O.E. Mid-East to make direct application to the American S.O. for equipment of this type. It was con sidered however that if the American S.O. can become possessed of aircraft soaernft etc. it might be possible for them to send thorn to thoir own Mission in tho Middle East and place thorn at the disposal of the British S.O.E. organisation. In doing this however it would bo necessary for tho American S.O. to send thoir own crows and spares etc. so that the aircraft could be serviced as an independent unit and it is clear that oven this plan would involve negotiations with the military authorities in Egypt. Nevertheless it was agreed that S.O.E.. London should make up a list of equipment in this category of which they stand in need and supply it to tho American S.O.  Regarding Non-Service equipment it was pointed out that tho British S.O.E. are themselves manufacturing all thoir own special devices and W/T sets. At the same time it was agreed, -7  thnt there v/as n shortage of certain types of W/T sets and broadcasting equipment. Accordingly it v/as agreed that S.O.S London should make up a list of their requirements under this heading and supply it to the American S.O. and it was agreed that so far as this equipment was concerned there could b'e no objection to the American S 0. either  a Despatching it to their American Mission in the Middle East or  b supplying it direct to S.O.E Mid East.  Regarding personnel it was explained that there is believed to bo a shortage of '7/T operators in the Middle East and that it would be useful that if say 10 trained V//T operators could be attached to the American Mission for work in the S.O.E. Mid East War Station near Cairo. It was also pointed out that S.O.E. Mid East to-day recruits the majority of its Greek \and Jugoslav personnel from their respective armies and that it was desirable to obtain nationals of these two countries and of Bulgaria Roumania and Hungary from other quarters. Such personnel should be trained as W/T operators and as export organisers for infiltration into occupied countries where they can assist friendly elements to organise passive resistance sabotage and revolt.  2. WESTERN EUROPE It was agreed that in any attempt to arrive now at arrangements for co-operation in this sphere it was necessary to take into account the distinction between countries likely  to be invaded by the Allied forces and those not likely to be so immediately affected and also to allow for at least two distinct phases in the development of the situation set out below.  On this basis the following detailed agreement was reached.  A. INVASION SPHERE This sphere covers Norway Holland Belgium and Prance.  Arrangements for collaboration would have to go through at least two phases of which only the first could be discussed in detail at the present time. This first phase would bo one in which the British S.O.E would continue very much as it is at present working both on the development and operation of a field force of agents in each of the countries concerned and on the building up of an S.O.E. liaison organisation for attachment to the appropriate Military Commands to accompany them to the Continent whilst the American S.O. concentrated on preparatory work at the same time giving such assistance as they could to the British S.O.E. in its task of operating the field force abroad. This phase would end as soon as the stage was reached when the question arose of an S.O.E liaison organisation attached to an American Command taking over the actual operation of a field force abroad  FIRST PHASE  a Organisation in the Field  It was agreed thnt it was essential that the field force in each of the four countries concerned should continue to be treated as one whole the object being to create throughout the area likely to be invaded by Allied Forces a single, United Notions Fifth Column organisation to he at the disposal of the Allied invading force -whether American or British. This would mean in practice that the American S.O. Mission in England would not with the exception of the case referred to at the end of this paragraph put agents of their own into these countries who would function separately from the existing field force and who would he operated separately hy them from London. If agent personnel were available from American sources it would he treated exactly like agent personnel available from other sources and infiltrated hy the existing headquarter organisation into the appropriate country to work as part of the one existing field force there. In effect during this first phase there would he no change in the character or method of operation of the field force abroad the American S.O. simply contributing such assistance as they could in regard to personnel equipment facilities intelligence etc.. The type of assistance particularly envisaged hy the British S.O.E. representatives was passports air transport and assistance regarding dollar transactions.  The exception referred to above is the case of American representation at Vichy. It was appreciated that as long as the United States retain diplomatic relations with the Vichy Government it was possible for the American S.O. to have an organisation based on their diplomatic mission inside Vichy France and in fact they have made all arrangements to establish such representation. It was further recognised that American S.O. representatives in Vichy would inevitably make contacts and create though perhaps not on a large scale a system of agents. It was agreed that such a field force should not as far as could at present be seen have any direct connection with the normal S.O.E. field force in France. At the same time to avoid confusion it was agreed that  i this Vichy organisation would be operated by the American Mission in London and not by Washington direct and  ii that the S.O. Mission in London would operate in closest collaboration and in accord with the general direction of the British S.O.E. French Region.  b Liaison Organisation  It v/as agreed that the American S.O. Y/ould concentrate primarily upon the recruitment and training of liaison staff v/hich vYOuld eventually be attached to the American Commands in order to provide for the latter S.O. services in the areas in Y/hich they would be operating. It v/as envisaged that the American S.O. v/ould recruit this personnel in the United States give them preliminary training there and then send them to. England for further training. Such recruitment and training v/ould of course be tl e responsibility of the American S.O but the British S.O.E would place all training facilities in England at their disposal. The American S.O. would of course only require to recruit liaison personnel for attachment to American Commands with qualifications for operating in those countries which would be invaded by American forces It was considered probable that a sufficiently definite indication of these countries could be obtained at an early date. As soon as such indication had been given British S.O.E. would cease  to recruit and train liaison personnel for those countries which had been allocated to American Commands.  At least a certain proportion of the American S.O. liaison personnel v/ould have to be given as part of their training an, intimnte knowledge of the field organisation with which they would have eventually to work and this could only he done hy  training them in the country sections concerned at British S.O.E Headquarters.  SECOND PHASE  This phase would commence as indicated above when not only had there been a definite indication between British and American forces but when also the American S.O liaison personnel for attachment to American Commands had been more or less completely organised and the question arose as to whether they ought not to take over the operation of the field force in the areas in which they were going to function. It was agreed that it would be impossible at this stage to lay down arrangements to cover this contingency since so much would depend upon factors which are at present unknown e.g. the actual allocation of the Commands the imminence of the invasion itself etc.  Thus if Norway were allocated to the United States Forces it would be comparatively simple once they had reached the necessary stage of development for the American S.O. liaison organisation attached to the American Command for this area to take over the operation of the field force in Norway absorbing for the purpose as much as was necessary of the country section which had hitherto been running it. On the other hand it would almost certainly 0 impracticable to split up the control of the field organisation in the area comprising the Low Countries and France since not only would the field force in France form a whole which could/not be divided between two separately controlling headquarters'in London but also' the activities of the field force throughout this area once the invasion had started would be of more or less equal importance to all parts of the Allied Line except in the areas immediately behind the actual fighting. For example sabotage activities in the area of Liege of Luxembourg or of Chalons could bo equally useful to British forces fighting in the Low Countries and North-Eastern France or American forces fighting in the region of Rouen or Amiens A good deal will obviously depend upon the form of military command eventually established and it might be found that if the supreme Command headquarters for the whole area were established in England the concentration of the whole S.O. Headquarters with that Command would be the best solution. It was accordingly agreed that the way in which the control of the field force which during the first phase would be concentrated in the British S.O.E. Head quarters should be allocated between the British and American organisations and would have to be worked out gradually as the situation clarified.  B. NON-INVASION SPHERE . This sphere covers such countries ae Germany Italy Switzerland Poland Czechoslovakia and Sweden. The con clusions reached regarding the way in which collaboration should be effected in these areas can conveniently be set out under the three following headings  Poland and Czechoslovakia  In regard to these two countries the secret armies and other underground resistance organisations arc operated by the Governments of the countries concerned so the role of S.O.E. whether British or American Will continue to be essentially that of providing them with all possible assistance. It was, recognised that the British S.O.E. have already Been working for a considernhlctime on the joh of assisting Poles and Czechs and co-ordinating their activities with the strategic policy laid down hy the Chiefs of Staff Committee and that at any rate for some time to come the role of the American Mission would only he that of providing assistance which they could make available more easily than the British.  It was agreed that in order to avoid line-crossing  a all dealings with the Poles and Czechs in regard to S.O.E. activities would he carried out hy the American Mission in London and not hy Washington direct and  h whether as a result of an approach hy the Poles or Czechs or on their own initiative the American S.O. Mission in London would not make any arrangements for the giving of assistance to these Allies without first consulting the British S.O.E. and concerting the a measures proposed with them.  Germany and Italy  It was agreed that at any rate at the present stage there was no need to insist upon a single S O.E. field force in ticse two countries and that there would prohahly he room for a long time to come for separate British and American organisations working in these areas. At the same time it was recognised as obviously essential if line-crossing were to he avoided that there must he some clearing house for the operations of the two organisations. It was agreed  a as far as American S.O. was concerned Germany and Italy would ho operated hy the S.O.E. Mission in- London. and not hy Washington direct.  b that the American S.-O. Mission and the British S.O.E. Headquarters should work in the strictest collaboration in regard to these two countries keeping each other  fully advised as to progress and policy and that they should endeavour as far as possible to allocate exclusively to one or the other the various contacts and channels available. Sweden and Switzerland  Special problems arise in connection with these two countries since they represent bases from which work can he carried on into several areas.  a Sweden  It was recognised that the American S..0. would wish to establish representation in Stockholm It was pointed out hy the British representatives that their present Mission in. Stockholm was engaged on four separate functions namely work into Norway work into Denmark whore we work for S.-I.S as well as for ourselves and preparations for post-occupational work in Sweden itself and work into Germany. It .was pointed out that whilst with work into  Germany the general principle laid down in paragraph h above could have been easily applied and would have involved no very close connection between the American S..O. represent ative in Stockholm and the British S.O.E. Mission there work into Norway Denmark and Sweden itself was a much more delicate business. As regards Norway it was clear that activities in this country must he governed hy the arrangements, for Invasion Countries set out above in Section A and that it would be impossible for the American S.O. representative in Stockholm to operate any field force in Norway.  As regards the other three countries it was -agreed that he should work in the closest possible collaboration and in accordance with the general direction of. the head of the British S.O.E. Mission in Stockholm.  b Switzerland  Switzerland is a base for work into Germany Italy and Prance It was felt however that unlike Stockholm it would probably be sufficient if it were agreed that any American  S.O. representative in Sv/itzerland should be operated by the American S.O. Mission in London and not by Washington direct and that the. American S.O. Mission in London should in this connection work in the strictest collaboration with the British S.O.E. Headquarters each keeping the other fully advised with regard to progress and policy and that they should endeavour to allocate as far as possible exclusively to one or the other the various contacts and channels available. With London thus being used as a 'clearing house' it was felt that it would not be necessary or perhpas not even advisable for the local representatives in Switzerland to have any connection with each other.  3. NORTH AFRICA AND THE IBERIAN PENINSULAR A North Africa and Gibraltar  The following provisional arrangement was arrived at in regard to this area  i North Africa including Spanish Morocco to be regarded as predominantly an American sphere of influence.  ii The American S.O. to establish the Mission for North Africa the head of which would be responsible for S.O.E. activities in that area. The existing British organisation would continue and its personnel would remain administratively and operationally responsible to a British head but the latter would operate under the general direction and control of the American head of the Mission machinery will be set up to this end.  iii General policy would be agreed between Washington and London and instructions would be issued by Washington to the American Head of the Mission a copy of any such agreed instructions would be sent from London to the head of the British organisation.  iv Gibraltar as an S.O.E. base from which supplies of arms and equipment transport facilities and W/T facilities are made available would remain outside the area of the North African Mission and under the control of the head of the British S.O.E. organisation.  v In order to ensure the closest co-operation and liaison between the Mission and the local British civil and military authorities machinery will be set up which will enable the Governor and C-in-C Gibraltar and the British, -12 -   Gonsul-GGncrnl Tnngier to oxcrciso the neccssory supcrviGion and co-ordination.  B SPAIN AND PORTUGAL  In view of the fact that S.O.E activities in Portugal w  other than the uso of Lisbon as a base for'the creation of lines of communication into Prance have been practically reduced to nothing by the decision of the British Ambassador and the Foreign Office and of the fact that British activities in Spain arc to all intents and purposes directed and controlled by the British Naval Attache in Madrid it was agreed that there was no need to come to a detailed agreement regarding collaboration between the British and American S.O.L.s in this territory in the course of the present discussions. Such collaboration as was possible could be worked out in due course on the spot between the present American S.0. re presentative at Lisbon and Madrid -or by his successor if he were removed -and the local British representatives.    It was indicated by the S.O.E. representatives that it might bo very convenient to have the American S.O. handle the few W/T contacts left to the British S.O.E. in Portugal.  It was made clear that the section operating in Lisbon on linos--of c-ommunieation into France would not be included in any arrangements for collaboration in the Iberian Peninsulr  proper.,  6h' Local nr 95a  CIPHEI TEI-ECRAM. FROM NEW YORK OESP 0012 27 6 42  R.ECD 0930 27 6 42 cj.ttd    sn' c u ' I fin ED.I'AT  ' . FOLLOW INC-.'FOR C.D PERSONAL DECIPHER YOURSELF FROM 'G  MOST-SECRET 'PLEASE' PASS COPY TO C S0S -FOt.LOWlkG IS. TEXT OF DIRECT IVES BY JOINT UNITED' .STATES 0a 0 So OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES  f. 'UNDER -A.-NSUTARY ORDER APPROVED BT COMNANDER-l-N-CHI-EF. QN . JUNE T3tH .1942 OFFICE. OF -STRATEGIC SERVICES IS TRANSFERRED TO jURiSDiCTl-OH OF JOINT UNITED'STATES C O.S AND G 50 000 IS MALI DYAS DTRECTOR OF STRATEGi'G SERVICES. . PL ' FUNCTIONS OF OFFICE 'CF StRATFCIC SERVICES Wt-LL BE '. . ' ''. ' ' g '' V' . 'CA5 TO PREPARE SUCH INTELLIGENCE STUDIES'AND SUCH . r RESEARCH AS DAY' BET CALLED'FOR .BY. JOINT UNITED ' ' 'STATES'0 0 5 SIHlITA Y lNTELLfQENCE .DIVISION OF . WAR '.-DEPARTMENT' GENERAL STAFF AND/-0FFICH.' OF' NAVAL '  ' I NTEU i SENSE. OPERATING AQPKALLY' THROUGH JOINT UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE 'COftHITTEE ' / . '' -' '' . . ' CB3 UNDER 'DJRgCTrOM OF JOl-NT .UNITED'STATES C.G.S. TO PREPARE PLANS FOR'AND TOALECUTE SUBVERSIVE ACT VITIES' m  CCA -' TOOf ARATL AND' TAaIN AN ORGANLmTION FOR COLLECTION Of iNFORNA'non Through espionage and to' furnish joint UNITED 'STATES AND SUCH AGENCIES OF WAR AND NAVY DEPARTMENTS AS JOINT UmfED STATES XL CHS ' HAY DESIGNATE SUCH tm fNrCR NTION AS THEY MAY -REQUEST my 4MMEDIATEL.Y POLLC WILG TELEGRAM   'P AT' 1049 27 6 42 ' MET, ,   s  tf 966  o CIPHER TELEQRAM FROM NEW YORK OESPATCHEC 0204 27/6/42  HO.-28.526  RECEr'VED 7 /' '  i H r ED I A7 E FOLLOW NG FOR C D PERSONAL. DECIPHER YOuRSEf/D Mf IMMEDIATELY PRECEDiNG TELEGRAM Class & cv  AM ADVISORY COMMITTEE OF REPRESENTATIVES' FROM - u 1 STATE DEPARTMENTo' 2-BOARD of economic WARFARE j CO-ORDINATOR OF fNTER-ANERJCAN'AFFAIRS  4c OFFICE OF WAR - NFORMATIOD'AND 'FROM TIME TO JiS EFRESEI'TAT VES 0F SUCH QTHER govenmemt  AGENCIES AS HAY BE CALLED UPON. TO SERVE 'D  THE JBP6WCCoREPRESENTATIVE GF CHIEF OF FLAMS PIV 5nw  OFFICEOFCOMINCHOROFCHIEFGFOPERATIONSi un Hu BEREPRESENTATIVEOFJ.P.W.C..TOSERVEONCOHHITTFFrON TIf w POLICY SUBJECT TO EXECUTIVE ORDER 9182 JUNF 13TH h' JRMATf0  MY IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING TELEGRAM.  TP  1S32 27/6/42 NEW  ', \  H . LOCAL'NR 968 CIPHER TELEGRAM .FRO MEW YORK DESPs. 1.54 27.6.42 RECDo OS.50 ' 27.6.42. NOo M2C L.MNE t ' 1AT Cvia-ss  FOLLOWING .FOR C.D. PERSONAL DEC. PHER i YOURSELF.    KY HEED ATE PRECEDING TELEGRAM. ' \   THE DUTIES OF JOINT PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE REPRESENTATIONS SHALL'BE.6- ' . ' .  . THEREWASCOHJOHCTlOfLWITHJERUSALEMSUEORDIMATE SKOIES OF JOIJT UNITED STATES -CHIEF DEPUTIES. STAFF AND STATE DEPARTMENT OR OTHER EX STI.MG '   . 'S. TO' I i ATE  ' ' FORHULATE AND DEVELOP PLANS FOR PSfiYCROLOOJCAL . UARSFARE. ' ' . 'OiFr-.-ATIO OF OBALBER OF COMMERCE JOINT UNITED .   B .   S 5 TO JO-OFFIMATE .PSYCHOLOGICAL ACTIVITIES OU OTHER UNITED STATES CTjVSSNLENTAL ARENG F0 Eu TO' COLLABORATE WITH   4Af'l'0NS TO THE. END THAT ALL PSYCHOLOGICAL W/ -' E S3 IN ACCORD LE E STRATEGY APPROVED BY JOINT UNITED STATES'CECLS.S E E E '-E. A . C. '0 llAte tee E'TE'-'.nEVE /ges cies'EOR HPLEMENTINC ' APPROYEC RSYSHO-pC Cl . WARFARE FLAMS. .  r TO OMnEr LtVohoECESCAL'WARFARE PLANS TO THE Ut S.  'F . .'E -E. .T EE . E' T -T EaST .  MY I EhiVl.Y EiC. lEL ' E  E E  'E. E ' MET  ' '1 'EF ', .LOCAL NR 959 CIPHER TELEGRAM FROM NE W YORK DESP. 0204 27 6 4 RECD 0935 2776 42  NO ' 2872g. ' '' IMMED lATE  . FOLLOLjNQ FOR C. DL PERSONAL DECIPHER YOURSELF  MY IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING TELEQ&AK  .   ' ' '. 3 the SUP COMMITTEE OF'DOINT PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE COMM17TEF SHALL BE CONSTITUTED AS A WORKING COMMITTEE7'' .ITS pUTIES SHAH  BEr .   A3 TO.PREPARE WHATEVER PLANS ARE DIRECTED DY . THE JOINT FSYCffOLOGICAL WARFARE COMMITTEE  S3 TO HASNTAIN UAISON WITH ALL OTHER' GOVERNMENT . AOEL'CiES-ENGAGED IN LIKE WORK  CO TO ESTABLISH AND. MAINTAIN LIAISON WITH ANY SUCH REPRESENTATIVES iHUNITED STATESOF -'UNITEDNATIONS AS .ARE ENGAGED -Em PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE ACTIVITIES, I attach our appreciation of the meaning of a recent series of telegrams from New York on the Psychological Warfare Committee. AD/P. would like to know whether you agree with it for if so it should be of interest to the Sections concerned and particularly to the Security Section in tracing future references., 4  30th June 1942.  3EGRET  L/lM/322.'  U.S.A. JOINT PSYCHOLOGICAL JARRARE COIIUTTBE ORGANISATION AND DUTIES AS EXPLAINED IN TELEGRAMS 28326-726 OE 27/6/42 ER0I.1 NEW YORXT  Joint Chiefs of Staff J.C.0.3.  etc.  Office of Strategic Services   Director -Col. Donovan  Functions Intelligence and research for J.C.O.S. 1 Services through J.I.C Preparation of plans and execution of subversive activities Training and operation of S.I.S. and supply of intelligence to Service Departments designated by J.C.O.S.  i -j etc.  x. Joint Psychological Warfare Committee J.P.W.C. 1  Committee Advisory Committee  Members -Dir. of Strategic Services Col.Donovan Chairman. Members -Representatives of State Dept. E.O.  Board of Economic Warfare -M.E.T   Assist C.O.S.T Security Branch - II.1.5 Dir. Office of Naval Intelligence D.N.I. Co-ordinator of inter-American   a Chief of Operations Div. War Dept. G.3. D K.O. 27S OC -i / Office of War Information M. of I   b Chief of Plans Div. Office of C.in C. ' - B.G.S. Other Govt agencies as   Plans Home  Forces co-opted. or their representatives.  Working Sub-Committee  Members -Represent .ves of Mil. Intelligence Dil -War Dept. G.S. D.M.I. -Ops. Div. War Dept. u.S. -P D.M.O. & P.j Office of Naval Intelligence -D.IT.I.  Plans Div Office of C. in C. - Planners JXome forces/  Office of Strategic Services.  Duties -Preparation of plans as directed by J.P.Yv.C. Liaison with other Govt agencies similarly engaged   representatives in U.S.A. of United Nations engaged in psychological warfare activities  Note Either a or b will represent J.P.W.C. on Committee on War Information Policy.  Duties of J.P.7/.C. Representations  1. Initiate formulate and develop plans for psychological warfare in conjunction with subordinate agencies of J.C.O.S. State Dept or other existing U.S. Govt agencies. 2. Co-ordinate under direction of J.C.O.S. psychological warfare activities of other U.S. Govt agencies and to ensure that all psychological warfare  accords with strategy approved by J.C.O.S  3. Collaborate with other interested nations 4. Designate executive agencies for implementing approved plans for psychological warfare. 5. Submit plans for psychological warfare to J.C.O.S. through Joint Staff Planners. x. It is assumed that J.P.W.C. is part of the organisation of the Office of Strategic Services. Copies to Ayftl fi through 1 U Section .1 File 1 Spares 3, , To. D Prom. A.D.4.  I attach an appreciation which the L. Section has done for your approval of the meaning of certain telegrams from New York as to the G.50 000 set-up.  I asked U. if he agreed with the L. interpretation and he replied that he did not. At my re'quest therefore he has done his appreciation .  Both are incomprehensible to me., e fi GFT/2S10. 10th July 1942 I write to confirm our conversation of yesterday on the subject of the agreement recently c me to between us and Colonel Donovan for collaboration between British and American n o. organisation My understanding is that tier were only two joints which you would 1 ke to se amended in the agreement contained In tb Record of our hlscusaions with Colonel Donovan s staff officers na nely   1 DUAuA. You wished duraa to be described as a British aphere of Influence into which the Amorloan S.O would be free to work from China instead of a in the exalting Accord a no-nan s land into which both the British organisation in India and the American organisation in Clilne were free to work.  li You wished it to be explicitly laid down in the Principles that in the allocation of territories us either exclusively or predominantly ritish or American the factor of Military Coraaftada in the area I -b l -principal coi It r 61 on and that the allocation of ter itorles on this basis should bo reviewed from time to time In the light of the development of the military situation. Thus for exam Is if ritish forces were some day to operate in China In circumstances which i ht. anount to this area coning under British .Military Command we should have the right to claim that the present allocation by which China is to be treated a-..-an American sphere of influence should be reviewed in our favour. It was further agreed that the procedure to be adopted in regard to any modification of the existing record of Discussions with Colonel Donovan s staff she id be as follows - . As soon as we had d the corsaents of both the Eld tli Chiefs taff. tn the iiecord we should advlss our Amerloan oolleagues of all the changes which were desired by our people. Colonel Donovan would presumably do the sme after he had received the ccEKaente of the Chi' fa of Staff ani the State Department. At that stage the question would arise of drawing up an amended agreement to bo accepted and signed by oth parties. llxis opportunity would b taken to draft an Agreement in a simpler and ..ore condensed fora that the existingrecord. r. o., In the -meantime w undertook to prepare for you a simplified and consolidated state ant of the conclusion embodied In the hecord of Diseuaalona and thin will be sent to you as soon as .-oselble . Loxley Esq Foreign Office Lon-ion . . .1. A V' I, Al/XX/l  13th July 1942.  TO V p PROM A.D  I refer to L s inemorandiMa L/XX/123 to me attaching an appreciation of the meaning of a series of telegrams from New York on the Psychological Warfare Committee.  This memorandum arrived during my absence on leave and was passed by A/D 4 to the U. Section for their comments the latter did not altogether agree with L's interpretation of the telegrams and produced an alternative chart copy of which is attached hereto .  Doth from the documents in question and from the fact that the U Section had the advantage of frequent conversations with 0.50 000 s officers and G.50 000 himself on the subject of the Psychological Warfare Committee of which G.50 000 was fully aware even though the President s Executive order had not then been issued I am quite satisfied that the U. Section s interpretation is the correct one.  As the position in Washington is now so extremely confused I do not think that it would be advisable for any appreciation of the position to be circulated to other Sections for the time being.  oQO', /xy /-i  Many thanks for your letter GFT/2510 of the 10th July about the agreement between yourselves and Colonel Donovan for collaboration between the British and American 3.0. organisations.  The two points which you mention in the second paragraph of your letter were I think the only two specific changes in the agreement suggested at the last Foreign Office -S.O.E. Meeting. At the same time as Sporborg and I explained to you a good many other ideas and suggestions were ventilated on both sides. Most of the discussion was however either inconclusive or of a preliminary nature due partly no doubt to the fact that it was not entirely easy to study a series of documents in which some of the later papers amended or superseded points agreed in the earlier papers. It was therefore suggested at the end of the meeting that a single document should be prepared for further consideration and that in the drafting of it regard should be had to the various views expressed during this preliminary discussion.  When this new single document is ready it will obviously have to be considered here in detail and then discussed with you at one of our meetings and I should think it is quite likely that further amendments may then be suggested.  I do not suppose there is any misunderstanding between us on this but I think that I ought to make it clear that the points which I mentioned to you at our talk are by no means necessarily final.  Colonel G. F. Taylor. 1/, I imagine that it would probably be useful to discuss at a Foreign Office -3.0.E. meeting the future procedure to be adopted as between yourselves and Colonel Donovan but for what it is worth I agree with you that the procedure which you suggest in the third paragraph of your letter is probably the simplest and best., w /  4378  16th July 1942.  From W/s.  P  For your information Bill Bullitt told Morton  that Psychological Warfare had been removed from control of G.50 000. It was G.50 000 himself who thought that one up and who got the Chiefs of Staff in Washington to sign the order giving him this responsibility. I understand that the first paragraph of the order drafted by G.50 000 himself made G.50 000 solely responsible for defining what Psychological Warfare might Bob Sherwood however managed to get through at the back door at the White House and showed a copy of the order to the President before any damage could be done. The President has signed a blanket order as Commander in Chief of the United States Army and Navy to the effect that any propaganda activity allocated to G.50 000 by the Chiefs of Staff fcros to be cancelled automati cally.  Roger Makins is leaving to-day for West Africa  where he takes post under Swinton expecting to arrive Accra on Tuesday 21st. After some vreek or two there he goes on to Madagascar. Part of his Job there will be to resolve the LushGraffley- Smith problem.  A copy of the first paragraph above has been s ent to U., AD/ifeiC/14. 18th July 1942.  TOs A/r' . Caesar FROM A/D. As you are aware u strong Liaison Mssion has been sent to Washington to work with G.SO.OOO'a organisation. The purpose of this hiasion is both to discuss with 0.50 000 8 organisation any matters of mutual interest throughout the world and also to assist the 0.50 000 organisation in building up and operating its machine in the light of the experience of 8.0.0. over the last two years.  It is obvious that ior the successful performance of these functions the Mission must be kept as fully as possible in the picture regarding the activities of S.O.E. in all areas so as to be in a position intelligently to discuss all problems which may arise. u. Section is respcnslfcle for feeding the Mission wi h the necessary Information and keeping it fully up to date. ror this purpose he .ruot depend largely on what he is told and what is made available to him by other sections and the object of this memorandum is to impress upon all sections tiie necessity for the olcteet cooperation with If. in this matter.  There .ust be no question of holding back information for fear of it being used in the wrong way. In the first place it should be made perfectly clear that the information which If requires is for our Liaison fission in Washington and not for G.50 000 s organisation itself. Secondly if a section wishes to attach conditions to the use of the information this can very easily be done by the mems of a eraorandum which will be passed without alteration to our Mission in Washington. Finally if a section considers ih.ct the information is in its opinion too secret to be conveyed even to our Mission in Washington they should not make the decision on their own but should refer the issue through their Director to me  oOo, LS/ 1/1009 20th July 1942. Ftljl.  TO FROM L/S.  Communication of Information to Officers of the Office ofStrategic Services. The desirability of issuing some rules to guide Sections upon the above matter arose recently and it v/as decided to set up a small Committee to consider the problem. This was while A.D. was on leave and just before the new organisation grouping the Missions under him became effective. Reference was therefore made to AD/iJ. who appointed U. to sit on the Committee. The Committee decided that it was necessary for certain rules to be issued to act as a guide until the position was further clarified and AD/P. has now issued these recommendations in the form of a circular a copy of which I attach dealing with the matter from the Operational Security and Intelligence aspects. I thought it as well to put you in the picture as to how the circular comes to be issued as I do not know whether AD/U. will have thought it necessary to trouble A.D. on the matter and he might wonder what the history was., Uo  MOST SECRET  r - 1-.T r y y-yr 'r' Rt  2.Q. X.j  From AD/P  To All Directors Regional Heads and Section Heads.  Officers of S.O.E are likely to be called upon to an increasing extent to discuss matters with officers of S.O.E. s American counterpart referred to below as O.S.S.  Questions will arise as to the extent to which information may be disclosed to them particularly where the information is obtained from or affects other services.  The following rules are issued as a guide unMl relations between S.O.E. and O.S.S. are further clarified or until a general directive is issued by the J.I.C. when a further circular will if necessary bo issued   l Policy. S.O.E. policy may be fully discussed with the appropriate officers of O.S.S. No reference should however be made to future operations to be carried out by other ser vices save in areas where the U S. forces were likely to be involved or where subversive operations are the primary respons ibility of 0 .S.S. S.O.E. Projects and Operations. These should not be discussed with officers of O.S.S. in detail unless they are being called upon to play an active part.  Intelligence.   a From Most Secret Sources Intelligence obtained from these sources may not bo  communicated without express authority from AD/p. This author  ity will not be granted unless the intelligence affects theatres  in which the O.S.S. has a primary role or where it may affect  some major decision on combined S.O.E./O.S.S. policy. Where  authority to communicat is granted the intelligence will be  passed in a paraphrase form and no mention will be mad'1 of the  sources or method by which it is obtained.     k Other Intelligence. Other intelligence unless excluded by the proviso of paragraph i above may where necessary be passed to officers of O.S.S. This may include information from official summaries except those portions specifically excluded from communication to lower formations c.g. the sidelined portion of the War Office Summary and intelligence from S.O.E telegrams. When it is necessary to communicate intelligence contained in copy numbered OX reports or Foreign Office telegrams the gist of the intelli gence and its degree of reliability should be communicated ver bally but the document itself should not bo referred to.  2, 2   iv Technical Equipment a nd listhods. There ie no objection to showing or explaining exist ing equipment and methods to the appropriate officers of O.S.S. or discussing equipment or methods under development except that equipment and methods-on the most secret list of other departments must not be disclosed.  v Sabotage Handbooks. There is no objection to allowing appropriate officers of O.S.S. to. sec those books.  vi Syllabi cf Instruction and Details of Training. There is no objection to communicating those to offioers f -O.S.'S to the sam extent as to officers of S.O.E i.o details can be oommunicat d to those officers of O.S.S whose duties render-it desirable for them to be so informed .  vii Codes -and Cyphers. Thor is no obj ection to communicating the general linos upon which we work to appropriate officers of O.S.S. Details should not be communicated., KiY/us/ise 24th July 1842  tour ADj/ii3/l577. 1 'mvQ spoken to U regarding th arrange jent8 tidiiohwe should put in force for keeping the  v-. York Liaison iidssion advised of all important aotivities and developments in our Mission area.    It has bean decided that 1 shall send an advance copy . of our fortnightly progress report to U frean which he will eonooot a t l gra .i to be shown to me before despatch.  I think this should work well as he will so our full report before it has been cut about and could easily keep in touch with all developsasats. By seeing t e telegram before it is despatched we will b able to out out any items which we feel should not be passed to America  oOo, OPT/25  28th July 1942.  Dear Loxlej  1 attach hereto copies Sos. 1 2 and 3 of a suBjat&ry in the form of an agreamant of the record of discussions oetween British S.Q.E. and Aaerlean S.O. which took place during Colonel Donovan s visit to London.  As you will see I have provided for the insertion of paragraphs to meet the two points raised by the Foreign Office in the course of our conversations.  I have not included in this Sufimary Records Los. 4 5 and o which of course you have already but which are not concerned with matters of interest to the Foreign Office.  As a matter of interest I might mention that we have received a telegram from Hew York advising us that the agreement attached &s an addendum to Agreement Ho.5 has not been approved by the American authorities and that they have counter proposals to make.  Yours  Peter Loxley Esq t Foreign Office, Fil COPY NO 6.  so. -mci o 11 Uicli betwoon iTtCaje.s.aru ... .- L. and A. ..O.CAN S.O. t . Me. D  Tbs follosin. is a fairly full ausaaary of the fi rceraeat reac hed in the ocuree of diaoussions between officers of th iiritiafc ' .0. and the dr rloan .0. bctweeri the 10th and 22nd .Tune 1042. Tills agreejaent was conflrmd by Sir Charles Iaubro on the one side and Colonel fonovan on til other on the unr ersl.andin that if .onif he sub itted h f. for.-.er to Lt.c . . . T andct p fioe and by the latter to the iUaerlcaa Chiefs of Staff at-the state Uec-ertoenb for their approval. X The irinciplos on wMch thl A reentmt are based are as follows 1 Co-operation at headgmartera X ondon/ '.gehlupton The object of euoii oo-operation is to achieve a  cu-fion policy and to avoid crossInc of lines In regard either to policy or to the supply of aaterlals. for tills purpose close liaison between headquarters is easentlai. Thl liaison will be effected by a British liaison section work-in aloivaide Colonel nonovan a headquarters in Washington and & eisallar Aaerican liaison section working alongside . . . dsadquarters London. The duties of this liaison section would b a To represent the views of their respective headquarters on all ollcy natters so that a oo - -.on oI 1 oy for Over -ofoafre con be kecidod on. b To discuss with the 1headquarters to which they have been acor . .od -eases ei le ute In the field which have been referred to that headquarters o To oKehanre imorrmtion and to koep their headquarters fully info w d of .mlters of interest. d To co-ordismt thifi production deMand and supply of oqulpnent froia British mi' f.O. sourcesi e To exchange both operational and tocinleal iatelll enee cad Inforation on ciethods of training. Such a liaison section id lit consist of on head liaison officer who would be a high level representative charged with executive functions supported by requisitestaff. 1, c i-omj&Z'ju i Vi. It la o&aanti&l to avoid the aituetioa iir the re will be two ceapletely Independent Oi\ ni tloiie workingin the fieldi with ell the osaeeguenfc dangers of crossing of line eoapetltlon for events end mterlal etc. and inviting tfee pt '07 foreign . over 'u. nts or gr ups with whoa both organisations would be dealing to play om off against the other In sous oases the problem will be dealt with byassigning a given region exclusively either to the Jkierloan or arltish organisation the organisation which agrees to stay out hoiitg represented at the noat only by a liaison officer and a soall staff. There will however be very few of tlieso staple cases and in -ost areas the position will be tlmt whilst an ares Is predoeHnantly a drltish or Aneriean .pher of influcnoe both countrlea will iiave so jc Interests inside it and will need to establish sceao sort of representation find possibly a systes of ajenfcs. It Is a.. rced tiiat ths general principles to be adopted  in such cases should bet a bach area should be defined as feeing either a British or torlean r a.   To be Inserted at t o request of the Fc eign offices II is 'onderstSoS that In aHocatizwj arT area. prcdojainantly ell r to the Britlal or f rlttts organisation a rsiin consideration will fee the systemof nilltary cot' iarai prevailing in the si ea In question. dhUs nonaally whore ths local cotxuuid is iteiKPleea tbs area will unless sone special'over-ridingml ration s liei bo allocated to .Aacricon -S.0 where ti CCMSml Is oritieli tii allocation will fee to the 'Iritis E It is further understood that such allocation will fee reviewed in the light of any development in the s llitary situation .thua e cfiango in rauuna i'ron Aaerioan to rltlali or vice vers will fee followed fey a corresponding change in the allocation of the area b inside a irltlah area it will b agreed that the control arid direction should fee iritiah and that the policy should fee lain down and all Instructions to the  -Isslon or Missions in tlmt area sliould be issued fra X-ondan. In m .tesrioan area tlm amm procedurewould apply m regards Washington. c la the field in a -ritleM axma tlicra would be a .rltish Mission th head of wliich would fee Controller for the whole area and who would look for Ms direction and inatrustIons to Tendon If the ifeicricane so wished there could be n Anerleen Mission in w saRis territorywlxicl would have it own hcail uMc'tors its own station  and It own e smbs but the Aacrican Miasleu seal its  head at those headquarters would work under the direction and control of ths .ritish controller ihc hoed-of tL Assrican . .lesion could report direct to Washington on any natter la wished wltha copy to tluj American liaison .mission in London but he would receive his instructions froa London and tlirough the irltigh controller and would,   only act on oocKronlcatlona received direct I'von Wimhlnctoa with tin agreesami and oonsent on the British controller. In n At erlcan territory the amm/i principle would apply with the role reversed. d In the event of a difference of opinion arlalng between the British or Aoerlean controller end tli head of the hrltiah/or iteerican ..lesion Inside hie territory which could not be settled locally the Issue would b referred to hosdon or ashington respectively and it would be the responsibility of the headquarters in question to settle it with the liaison mission attached to it.  ' ven thm rather general prinei let nay not be able to be applied strictly In all cases and it may be necessary to make exceptions in certain countries to meet special requirements. XI. It was agreed that the following areas could be allocated in accordance with t x foregoing principles without raising any .very serious problems. 1 hebia  It was agreed that India should be regarded as & British area where all operations would be carried out by the iritish idssion with control being exercised froa tendon. Tiw Mmriemi S.O. would have She right to send out a liaison nission t toe attached tp the British Mission for liaison purposes but not for operational purposes. 2. CHXHA It was agreed triat this area of which the headquarter would b at dtasingklng and which cover the vtoole of China including Japan a -occupied China faaehurla and dorea should be regarded as an jkmrlQm. aplmrts of inf1uonc . The American fission would be established at Chungking and would direct all S.O. activities in this area. It would bo controlled fro Washington. The existing British Mission at Chungking would be reduced and would be turned into a liaison mission attached to the imerican Mission. The British liaison mission in addition to Its liaison duties would render any assistance which it could to the American fission but only at Kti latter s request and under the letter s control. 3. AiSTKABIA It was agreed that .'Jritlsh S.Q.S. would have no responsibility for and would take no action in the area covered by General he Arthur s Command and tiiat of the  asrioaa liavei Camaand in the South western waoiflo. This area would to considered as covering l ew .'Juinoa and the Islands of the hast Indian archipelago up to and including Java and Borneo. It would be for the American S.O to amice its own arrangements with the I.S.P which already exists in Australia under General MaeArthur & control. Writish 3.O.E. would continue to give any assistance asked for to this Mission. 4 To be inserted at the request of the foreign Office '  BUKMA  It was agreed that Bums should be a British area but  that Auerloan S.O. should have the right to work into it  as convenient from China., 4  5. H'&OmQillUA li&LXJA JOb i L KA It wm ttL reecI %tmt tiaeao ureas should be recarded as & nonaan s-liuad wMch could be worked Into as convenient by the lirifeieh S.O.E. Mission la India the Aoerlean S 0 Mission In China and I S D la &u tralla. Line crossing inside tMe/srsft would have to b avoided toy close liaison between the three missions.  6. M Si At-MiCh It was agreed that tli area covered toy the Srltlsh S a E Mission which already exists with Its headquarters at Durban chsrced with working-Into Mod ' aear sad Portuguese ' set Afrlea should be regarded ae a Drttlsh eree & srleen r 0. would have the right to have a liaison mission attached to the Srltlsh mission at rwtoan.  7. UV&T AshLQA PUAiM..0T Slid y. CjLZ Whilst it as agreed that the area covered by these two existing Drttlsh B.OuM t isel me -meaely the west African colonies fror t southewa boundary of orocoo to the boundary of South Moat Afrloa with Portuguese West Africa should for the tlm toeing to regarded as predor.ilnanfcly a itish spHasre It was reco.gniMd that the Aaerleari D b had a wry definite Interest In this area since if say military action on-a l&r e scale were to be undertaken toy tim United MatIons in West Africa such action would predcalnantly toe the res oriaitollity of the Amsriesn military authorities. 2hs American S 0 therefor consider that they iaust place themesIves In a position to to stole to cerry out S services for the fmeriisam Cecaoand if such & situation should arise. Hi following procedure wfc accordingly agreed upon  Mraerican would sstatolish isslcns eorresponding to our rawest and oucols hiscions. The profirsams of these American Missions would be worked out in a much Detail as possible between Washington and London. Copies of this agreed programme would then to sent to the Heads of the American Piaslone and the Uead of the British Missions with clear instruetIons in both cases that the execution of this SHrogrettae toy the teerican HIasions would to dleoussed step toy step with the heads of the British fission and no action taken until creeseat had boon reached with theta. if such sgreeMist ooul-d not toe arrived at Urn point at issue would to referred to hoadquartejs to to settled between London and Washington and until decision was Qtmn no action would to taken by the Asserle&n '.lissiosai. It was contemplated ttuftt the prograjaae which would too worked out between London and toasbington for these American Missions would be essentially preparatory in character consisting of the placing of Anerlcsn representatives at Appropriate point the establishment of duap of smterials the collection of information my& operational Intelligence aad the working out of plans against appropriate target .  It was agreed that as had already been arranged with the Minister resident the situation in .'.set Africa would as regards him to analagou to that eaisting In Csiro and that the Head of the Sritieh Mlsalon in Waat Africa would act as the link between any American Mission si the Minister Kasldaat. putting up tb the latter the reeulremants of the Ai-srlcan Misaian and conveying to them tu decisions of the Minister resident., 5  8. jgr Airriv It was agre 4 fehAfe thsss Island e Kapr l l g the Atoms j. edslrm ttue Csnariea and Uk Caps VsisSUi Islands should mg 3Pd fi as ai Jsasrictn sphsm sad o crated by aa Asterloaa Mission embroiled from v a liin t m Ihs British E-.Q.S. would haw th ri Ut to sifc&sfc liaison offioers to th Ataeriem orgaaisstioa.  It was apNNMS that lisilaal should bo regarded a an Aasrlcan sphere and that th Oritish 5' .3 E. should plaee all facilities aid contacts useful for this country at the disposal of their Awrican oollsaguss  10 KUt SXA S 0 E Imvihg oaplslJMd tbs position regarding their liaison mission la Moscow and their a/ wasssai with the i r .V h. that neither party would carry out any operations la the territory of the other except by autual arr age ent it was agreed that as the Aaerloan S 0. had no intention lor the present at least of dealiag with Russia there was no need to work out smy arraa iaente for collaboration for this area  III. A More detailed egreeaeat was ccets to in regard to the following areas which present somwb&t ec lioatod problem . i. BALiiAMs Am tm Mimm eaiv. It was agreed that. In view of the fast that all unitary Co.usaaade in this area were Britieh Sossa&ads that the principsl political authority was ti'i British Minister of State at Cairo and that the whole of the territory other than Turkey -within which and frm which operation could take place r be based -was wholly or partially under British military occupation tlse area at present cowered by the British 'v. with its headquarters at Cairo should be regarded m predominantly a British area. At the mw tine it was appreciated that there were aay waye ia wh ioh the Auerloan 8 0 eeeld be of great assistai in this area. It could call upon resources in regird to equipment materials and possibly personnal which were not available to the British S.O.S. and la certain areas -for exa le Turkey and Iren - American pertooael could ia erne respecie operate more easily than British personnel. It was accordingly agreed that th aot-up should he as follows s-   Si controller of the existing British  C E Klseim would be regarded ae being in charge of all n.o S. operatic in that area and would he responsible for all S J E. activity to the local authorities -particularly Urn 3 0 S.  aub Co ffldtte of the Miniate of ftate s via Council and to headquarters in Tondon. An Ab&ricmi S b Mission should be set up ia Cairo with the object of providing such aselstanoe as It could to the British .3 E. and of contributing to the hritish C.o E. service which would only be available from tius heeriesn side fli forsa and, / iei aYlwn  6  extent of the orgaiiiaetlon of the itoaerloan 'laaioii and ale th& cope ftnd e reoter of It festivities would be discussed end settled by the ]ie d of the Mmvictai lesionwith tii British Controller under whm he would be working. In tlie event of failure to rsmh SQrmemnt the Issue would be referred to lieadqusrters to he settled between London end Washington mid in tlae mmntlm the views of tbs Controller would premil fhe Head of the /oeriosnHisalon would oomyuilcfet direct wife WsmhinQtm on &nj urntter he pleased but It would be clearly laid down that as regards mr action the / ericfen It ion uouM look to the Controller for direction and inatruction would take no feetion except wltl hia approval. With regari to such Q&xmmlomtlom between Sasliington and fclio oed of the Smarlomi i'.is ion In Cairo It was agreed that all such telegram -whether origina ting froa Washington or Cairo -should be repeat to the itaaerlcan Mission attached to L.u L lozidan. It was also agreed ta&i It would be the rfeeponaibliity of ti /mmrlotmmission In London to keep British 5.0 1 informed as to the content of 11 such maaa.ges which affect British interests. Xt was agreed that if the Anarlean PiesIon set up their awm war Station in Cairo It would be used only for emuiiieatIons with Washington as tiui war station belonging to 5 0.S hid-Sast i als ady adequate for hundling all 3osatsmications with scents In the field ' The substantial effect of this arraiigaMint would be tiiat there would be a single 1 . aacLino in the area at the head of which would be tbs present Controller but that under him thei-e would be two orgnalsatlo ui mmX the existing British G I organisation covering tlw whole area of the .11 .salon and & snail steer can organisationwhieh would be fitted by the Controller into the gsmral  proiiraisam wherever It could help. in regard to the question of supplies of quiwaentfrom kmrlcm to d C S. Lid hast it was pointed out that such qulptsent earns uadsr two ofetegories namlyi  Service qui sa nt Inoludlng aireraffe naval  raft arms ewunltlca aedioal stores building aaterials transport paraohutea eontfeinera clothing and field telephonesj and b hon-Pervice specialised qulp nt includingexplosives sabotage deviees sf/T set . War Station and broadousting qulpmnt etc. With regard to the .formsr. It was pointed out that &.O.F. 111 feh British CcwornwentAercated for waging subversive werff&m but thfet tiss C-ijsbC hid last i responsible for all operation In .that theatre of war. S a .l plans m t therefore oonfom & C-in-O s operational rctuiremeat and to the strategic requireKents f the Chiefs of Staff 'They are therefore subsaifcfcsd to C-ln-C for hi eoncurrenco and. In carrying thess tit S.a.S. are acting m his sgents. It was remarked that this sachln ry has been set up to enable the oostblaad Chiefs of Staff to pool the resource of the Waited State and Grout Britain sad allocate then to the various theatres of war having rogerdalso to transport facilities ' It was aaeordlncly agreedthat it will therefore be issaossible for B.0 1 Lid Last to askc direct application to the AaefiSim S 0. for, 7  equipEi nfc of this Kypa Lt waa oonsidered however thut If the .terlean 3 0 can becone posseused of aircraft sc&creft etc. it bo possible for them to  end them to their own ids ion in the Middle hast and place them at the disposal of the .'ritish S.O.h. organisation. In doing this however It would be necessary for the American S 0 to acod their own crews and spares etc. so that the aircraft could be serviced an Independent unit and it i clear that even this plan would Involve negotiations with the military authorities in Bgypfc. nevertheless it was agreed that S 0.B. London should make up a list of equipment In this category of which they stand in need and supply it to tiie feerlcan L 0  Regarding Sc -S rvi e equipnent it w&a pointed out that the Eritiah 3 o s. arc thaiaaelves manufactwing all their own special vices and Vl/7 sets. At the settle time it w&s agreed that there was a abortage of certain types of /T acts and broadeasting equipment. Accordingly it was agreed that S.i.i'L London should make up a list of their requirements under this heading and supply it to the AswrlUan S 0 f and it was c e d that so far as this equipment w is concerned there could be no objection t the American g. . either  a hespatching it to their American liasion in tlie middle Last or b supplying It direct to S.o.E. Kid Bast. Begarding personnel it was asplained that there Is believed to be a shortage of /T operators in the ii ldle East and that it would be useful that if say 10 trained n/7 operator could be attaohed to the African fission for work in the s.o.E id Last war Station mar Cairo. It was also pointed out that s.l.E LM Last to-day recruits the majority of its Greek and Jugoslav personnel from their respective armies m& that it was desirable to obtain nationals of these two countries &nd of Bulgaria Kouxaaaia and liungas y rroa other quarter . Such personnel should be trained as operators and as expert organissrs for infiltration into occupied countries whore they can assist friendly clesients to organise passive resistance sabotage and revolt.  2. bLSTLhL LUKJfE It was'agreed that in mj attciapt to arrive now at arrangements for co-opsration in this spiicre it was necessary to take into account the distinction between countries likely to be invaded by the Allied forces and those not likely to to so Ismodiately affected and also to allow for at least two distinct phases in the develop ment of the situation as set out below.  on this basis the following detailed agreement was reached.  A. IIIVASiaM SfliLRE This sphere covers Norway. Holland Selgiusa and Frame .  Arrangemats for collaboration would have to go through at least two phases of which only the first could be discussed In detail at the present time. This, flrafc phase weald be om In willoh ttm iJritleh ' . ' h. would continue very rruah as it la at present workl M both on the development and operation of a field foroo of agents in each of the countrie eoncerued and on the building up of an r .0 E liaison organisation for attachment to the appropriate Military Commando to accompany them to the Continent whilst the American  S.o. concentrated on preparatory work at the aa e time giving such assietanee aa they could to the Srltleh S.u.h in it task of operating the field force abroad. la phase would end a aosm as the star was reached when the %ue tlon arose of an 3 0.E. liaison organisation attached to an Anorioaa Cosasand talcing over the actual operation of u field force abroad.  vnm u ornfenisatloii In fell .field It was gr d that it was essential that the field loro in aoh of the four countries concerned should continue to be treated e one whole the object being to create throughout the area likely to be invaded by Allied hare a single United MatIon Fifth Column organisation to be at the disposal of the Allied invading force whether Ansarlean or britlah. Thin would mean in practice that the Amrlcan . fission in -nglaad would not with tins exception of the case referred to at the end. of this paragraph put agents of their own into these b . .nirl e who would function separately fro the existing field force and who would be operated separately by them fro -lendon If agent personnel were available from American sources it would be treated exactly like agent personnel available fro other a. -ureas and Infiltrated by the existing head quarter organisation into the appropriate country to work as part of the on exitting field force there. In effect during this first phase there would be m change in the character or method of operation of the field force abroad the American 3.0 imply contributing such assistance as they could in regard to personnel equipment facilities intelligence etc . The type of assistance particularly envi aa d By the brltleh f -. representative wee passport air transport -and assistance regarding dollar transactions  the exception referred to above is the case of American representation at Vichy. It was appreciated that s long e t ie united State retain diplomatic relation with the Viehy Oovemaent it was possible for the American 8.0. to have an organisation based on their diplomatic mission inside Vichy Prance and in fast they have mad all arrangemonte to eetablleh such representation. It was further recognised that American 3.0. representatives in Vichy would inevitably make contacts ansi create though perhaps not on a large calc a system of agents. It was'agreed that such a field fore should not ae far a could at present be seen have any direct connection with the normal f.O.S. field force in France At the same tin to avoid confusion it wee agreed that  1 this Vichy organisation would be operated by tiie American klsalen in London and not by laahlngton directj and  ii that the S.d. fission in tondoa would operate in closest collaboration and in accord with the general direction of the British s.o.E French Legion., -  b U.ftl qn -Jy -milMat.ion It Agreed th..at the & irieaa S.o. would eoaoontrato prlmtlly upon the r crult5a at end training of liaiaon staff which would eventualiy be attached to the Aimrio&n Co.-ar.aMe in order to provide for the latter . services in the areas In which they would be operating. t was envisagedthat the American &.0 would recruit this personnel in the . United States give ti s preliminary training there m& then send tbesa to ..r land for further training. Gueh reerttitawmt and training would of course he the reeponaibility of the American s.o but the liritieh 3 0 6 would pirn all training facilities in Lngl&nd at their disposal. She American .0. would of course only require to recruit liaison personnel for attaoheamt to American CoTaands with quAlificatio.as for operating In those countries which would be invaded by M&rl&m forces. It was considered probablethat a sufficiently definite indication of these countries could fee obtained at an early date. As soon e. such indication had been given British I 0 S would cease to recruit nd train liaison personnel for those countries which had been allocated to Americaa Coataands At least & certain r .-orfeion of the Jtmrietm S.O. liaison personnel would hum to fee gives as pert of their training an intimate knowledge of the field organisationwith which they would have eventually to -.vork &n& this could only be ia fey training them is the country seetlozte coneoraed at Iritial. f.i.r . j ad uarters. S.SCU31 PSASS Shis phase would eceamenee as indicated above whan not only had there been definite indloation between brltieh and Mmrlmn force but when also the Mmrlcm S.o liatori personnel for attachment to American Camtmx s had been more or less couplet-oly organised and the question arose a to whether they ought not to take over the operation of the field force in the areas In which they were going to function it was agreed that it would be impossiblt at this stage to lay dawn arrangements to cover this ecntlngeney slnee to mmh would depend upon factore which are a.r at preterit ymlmmm  tlis actual allocation of the Ccmiruinds the imlmmtt of' the Invasion Itself etc. Thus If fiorway were allceated fee the United ftafees force it would be c p rAtiV8ly eisple once they liad reached the meaaaary atage of developaent for tbe AHerlaiai s.o. liaiaat organlaation attached to the eserioan demsod for this area to take over the operation of the field force In no w y absorbing for that purpose as auch cm was-neeassary of the  ouatry eeetion whleh had hitherto bean running it. On the other hand it-would almost certainly be leprae15cable to split up the control of the field organisation in the area eoaprlaiAg the Lew fountri-e and ' rwmw since not onlywould the field force is i'ranoe fora a whole which could not fee divided feotwean few. separately confcrolli ig headq-sarterei feondOB but also the activities of the field form throughout this &rm one the invasion had started would be of acre or-loss equal importano to all parts of the Allied line except in the areas lassedlatelj behind the actual fighting for example sabotage activities in the srsa of Lie gw of Luxembourg or of Chalons could be equally  useful to British forces fighting In the Low Countries and POrth Sastem France or American forces fighting in the region of houen or Amiens. A good deal will obviously depend upon the fom of .military soaataad eventually established and It might well be found that If tbs supreme Command, 10  he idquart ers Tor tlie wiiol io were ost&bllth&d In En-lwxd tlas Ji ntrfttion of fcht whole le idqu rt aniwith th&fc Co4-sa S. would Ve the beet solution. It wos ftecordlagly agreed that the way in which the c nfcroi of the field force whlc '. during the -first phase would be concentrated in the a iti Vi D E. Headquarters should be allocated between the British and Aaoricaix organisationsand would have to be to rk d out gradually as the situation clarified. l. Sfn.'.q This sphere severs such eountriee as berasay Italy twlftrliwlj NdrtWl SgeehceltWhta mid wed n. The conclusions reached regarding the way In whieh collaboration sliould be effected in these areas can conveniently be act out under the three follow 1 and djBeehoslovakie In regard to these two countries the secret armies and ether underground resistance organisation arc operatedby the Oovernments of the countries concerned so the rol of S.b.E. tehethsr British r American 111 confelnu to be essentially that of providing them with all possibleaseletsnee. It was rocognised that the British r.i h. have already been wox'.clng/r'xr a considerable time on tli& job of assisting roles and. Gseche and co-ordinating their activities with the strategic policy laid down by the Chiefs of Staff Committee and that at any rate for sesae tine to oceae the role of the AnarIcar. Issiim would onlybe tJxat of providing aesistanoe which they could .aak available saore easily than tbs Dritish. It was agreed that in order to avoid lino-erosslngj a all fisalings with the Poles and Csechs in regard to S.J.3h activities would be carried out by the toarioaa Mlssloa In London and not by fe-ashington  direeti ami b whether as & result of an approach by the -olee or Cseoha or on their own initiative tiw .American S j. Mission In London would not 1-s.ake any arraagesionts for the giving of assistance to these Allies without first consulting the British 8 0 1 and concerting the amiasures proposed with them It was agro l that at any rate at the present stage there was no need to insist upon a single .u E. field fores In these two countries mad that th r would probably be rom for & long time to ooc for separate British and teerican organisations working in these areas. At the a ecu thus It was recognised &a obviously essential if lias-crossing were to b avoided that tlx re must be some clearing house for tbs operation of the two organisations. It was agreed a os far a .mcrlo&a 3.0 was oeneemsd leraiBiy and Italy would be operated by the . ' . x.lsaion in London and not by Washington direct. to that the Jteerican f .. Elscion and the British 3.0.1 Headquarters should work In the strictest, -n   solifeboi' atioa in r p S to these two aountiplea  sepio li cUit . fulij 5vised to pro.ojrass  end polley said thet they eheuld oniefe 'o a% ca fas i oe&slfel to allocate exclusive to one or the otiMKP the various oatecte snd channels Speelel pro- esis arise In connection with these two fiouafeples siase tiiey represent aa fron Milch work .b earrled a -late severm erees. a iAa It was rs v i iu a Uu&t ti wcaila rleli to esfeebllsii smpr mntmthm In St kho3r- It was pointed out by tt irltiak repreeentatiws tiist thsstr preebntMission in tock iol vm igat d m four se-arat function mmlf work into lo ey work Into loramrk Mi re w work for f x S fit well a for owselft aad preperetions for pos Woeeujj&Uom work Xm ieeden end work lata Xfe pointed oat that Mills% with work into  msny the ral prineiple laid down in pers eph b shove could hmm been eaclly applied end would have Involved no very close con ieet l between the msr% m Z 0 represen tative in steekfaelm jal tsh British fe a S. fission tibere work Into terwsy PemiuiE and itself wwi a smah more delleate tiualaaiMs As regards dorwey it was clear that aaUvltles in thla coonfcry fisust be .governed by feh arrangeaente for invMion founfcriaa set cut above in Seoticea A imd that it would be lupoeelble fer t Ai rloaA f repreaeatativa la SfeSKjl ola to ooer&te any field force In ilorway. As regards tJu ether H rte countrie it was egreedthet i m r5s In tbe eleMiet p mmm eella ratleat fiur-in aoooroiinoo e&fh tft oenefftl direct if lead of th rlti h t . .jlesion in itackhoM. S itr rl M.. Is & base for work Into tiimrjmp Italy end .trance It o .e ftIt twtwr tluat wslile rtooidriolt it  9ttl4 probably be suffielesit If it w a oed that anyMmvi m i.t. rapreaantatiVB in Swlt erls aiio d be orerated by the Marietta. S.a. fiAiiisa in ioalon md not by  vm M.agtoa direct Mai tfest fire listerism S o a j6ioa la hendeo should la Hdls ecmaeotlea orl is %km strlefceet eoHeboratloa with the British ll o E iJeadquittrfcewi esih keeping the other -fully sd.vl 4 with regard to r rocr s and policy m& that they ahoald endeavour to alXocate as far as possible xaluslv Xy to am or the oth r the various ooataote aM olawinela available. Slth hoodoa thus being used s a 0leeri g hoaft it was felt that it would act be atoesaary or yertoa not even advlenble m the local reproeentatlvsa in Ewltserlaafi to. have any conaaotloai with ash ofeiiar., 12  a. i u MinQA m ' m iemiam A ijQrth. AT y.lfejg. .Ibt' Xtar Wm followIn j provisional asn &n aR nf wae arrive at in ragard to tMa aroas   1 lortli M'&Xm imlvAtrn Spanish ' or wsoo to b 3p S r4 4 as pro lTOlnaatlj an jfcmrtQtm aplsor of lafXt.&mee it aspiaan - . to tal Hali tfe himlmx for BqpUi ATrlam the bead of Whi sh aoiald b wiapoas.Ibl for ... .S atlvitiaa ia tiait ar . fSw SKlatiag. J rltiab or anlsatioa would ontlrat &.nd it ro0i -n l would nemln wSmliilafcrati'Wly  Bsd operationally raapocnaibi to ft british h d but t'm lattar would operate under tl e generaldlrwotloa end control of th feaerioan b 4 of tbe fieeX ft oiaobiaary will be set 'up to title ml. ill General poltey wbold be agreed bo tween AaaMagton  and tomion ana instructions would be issued toy Wnehlngton to the toerlean M ad of the fission a copy of any sueh agreed Inatruetions would toe seat froa bondoa to the head of t3 e liritlth organisation. lv litoraltar as a ''.f.f toaee free whieli euppllea of arms and q.uii nt transport factItties and W/f  faclllfelee art mad available would. s.i in outside the area of the Mertk Afrlean fission and -miner the control of the head of the fritlsli S.O.S orrani tion. v In order to exieore %tm eloeeet co.opfration and liaison toetween ths fission end the local frltisii civil and military authorities machinery will toe set up which will enable the Governor un O-in-C Gibraltar and the Britleh Consul-fen ml fasgter to aereise ties necessary supervision m& cc- rdlnatlori. to sfjern a i. F.vhuOid In view of %ha fact that S.OfE activities in Portugal other than the wee of-Lisbon ae a toaee for the ep I on of Xlnee of eoewimiefttion into rranee hove been practicallyreduced to nothing toy the decision of the British tobasaador end the Foreign iffla arid of the tm% that hritiah activities in Spain are to all intents mnA pur oeea directed and controlled toy the iiritieh Haval Attache la iiadrid & was agieed that there wae a need to to a detailed agreemnt regarding eellatooratloa between tbe British cm teerlcan S O.E In this territoryla the eouree of the present discussions such oolleboration a was poasitole could be worked out in due course on the spot  between the present mriesa r n esenta iv at Lisbon and Madrid -or by hi euocessor if be' were removed -and the local Sritleh representatives. It was indicated toy the is. vg. representatives that it isii ht to vary coatenlent to have the aerioan S.o handle the few W/T contacts left to the .British fi.o.r. in fortugRl. it was laad slesr that the section operating In r.isbon on lines of osa&unlcafcloa into i--ranee would not be included In any arraageaente for collaboration in the Iberian Fealnsula propar., 1. The directors of Plane have ncm conaidored the question of Au lo-lUS S. 0 F. eollftboiatloa and have forwarded the attached paper on ih subject to General Israay for-the Chiefa of Staff -. 2 You will see that they are still in favour and very strongly of the most intlraate fom of collaboration i.e one single joint organisation in each theatre This is the line which we were vmxm& they would take  3. You will note that the Directors of Plan do not accept our suggestion that any clang in our method of collaboration with v.S 0 000 should bo raised first by the British chiefs of otaff They recommend we should raise itaurasIvesdirectwithC.50 000 Itrwaainstobeseen whether our Chiefs of Staff will accept this reecfisosadation of the Directors of Plans I suggestyou should see Hollis so as to ensure your presence when the Chiefs of Staff disouse th matter 4 It is is decided that s 0 must initiate the matter with. 0 50 00 ' it will be-necessary to send on of our senior officers to IJ.S.A. .for-the purpose., 115th August 1942 a ]  m Secretary J.P.S rrn I t. Colonel D 'ralnnoss 1 .0 1. S.P. mtrnmnm J' ' 42 707  - -/ainlo-Araer-1can Collnbonnlion] I am afraid that through our-own fault paragraph 3 h page 4. . not too clear I think it slioulu he fmon lod e-on if it is only for the purposes of record 2 fhe necessary clarification could b secured by the following auendnent  after ...... in that area o.r n Id & new lino u an .roa declared tish sph re -H to D.C.D. A . A.D, G-yU.OjajJ UvLO \JhfM  QFT/50 12th August 1942.  Dear G.M  This is merely a hurried note of explanation which I hape may catoh the bag of my necessarily inadequate telegram Ho 8775.  I could not attempt to put you In the picture by tele gram for the txiro reasons indicated in Ho.2775J firstly the security aspect is being very vigorously stressed in London at the moment and we have been strictly forbidden by our masters to pass on to anybody the various things which we learn in the course of discussions at which we are present. This diffi culty can be I hope partly overcome by the exercise of care in a letter but would have been quite impossible in a telegram secondly the situation is very complex far from clear and changing daily. If I had attempted to summarise it in veiled terms in a telegram I would probably only have succeeded in thoroughly misleading you.  As I told you in Ho.2775 is leaving today by plane and you will have to obtain from him both general information about the operation in question which you will need for under standing the rest of this letter and the answers to the specific enquiries made by you in your Ho.82210.  Dykes oould certainly have given you the general picture and that he has not done so is evidently due to the same security instructions which are sealing my lips even tighter than Mr. Baldwin's.  Assuming that you can find out from X the general back  ground you should know the following, U/US/2l8 5 Sheet I 12/8/42 182. 3107 48146 09095 50812 56103 03914 77848 93103 74595 63129 92966 9677 32016 98979 39299 52068 86001 07256 95219 47203 18580 . 38888 1031S 07602 75735 -74079 06659 59096 76317 84972 75560 45320 13462 59081 26299 80541 58305 97891 01885 55068 12156 42047 46922 43357 64614 34896 29047 05169 11655 41023 58585 37776 79302 07278 49154 03547 21060 75244 94989 55243 56906 97815 86049 . 65212 10746 68513 20583 60466 06704 89403 99631 85494 88725 57057 66931 74061  71189 12956 99894 82577 81461 23561 12229 67208 64690 39572 56905 64964 85397 00546 85970 20041 70054 78106 41395 15031 21837 03382 96086 36487 51188 41167 19535 17719 93824 67466 51871 07168 88930 42581 734.42 33706 82015 77020 45206 40033 . 87425 38589 35082 85401 45646 32742 88640 66120 59254 56033 72599 59897 27941 21006 17333 84237 01462 83689 49815 74051 40655 41403 93188 54408 74008 98951 29035 65048 96320 71S0S 55737 91241 89654 02840, 26720 65134 12429 68250 35505 83113 98489 18949 58850 97810 38843 84504 52295 61364 00465 80641 79251 76243 80558 61332 00806 46308 70955 97643 51447 99848 22939 35069 26559 46719 90490 04533 59275 31093 83642 17480 03027 04444 18340 43804 29411 85325 23065 49090 86347 53352 27253 18764 84189 37597 52675 46384 72353 20974 91821 29830 91371 35939 22067 56321 47205 28640 95935 79395 88963 30892 84386 64742 17310 25543 82653 33205 56986 04809 57886 26806 53047 44683 93930 18151 28690 40490 07128 80685 23932 91249 39312 36164 08309 05012 94551 63437 84120 88615 02578 13309 35472 69334 96969 81309 81368 43128 36809 91312 10437 05290 36997 38342 02147 63178 69778 37091 97232 05320 54618 89365 73166 78016 37025 28031 38018 49448 95051 56912 57569 58603 55669 44425 69836 86122 16667 30758 21006 49795 49620 71355 70793 13498 47187 93887 9146a 33104 03591 78028 48255 77909 66702 70868 81346 17352 75035 21374 14471 13886 46234 \ i \ 90134 83029 98504 99752 39906, 60000 39815 64113 57585 92080 12984 09991 35230 30544 50625 11791 59002 78667 44343 50445 71460 27153 19824 77276 25110 12044 72749 66415 32225 98759 31970 17474 04076 43773 52732 31410 56116 02C22 77204 44720 61955 35818 76544 59747 64190 72562   ' 88568 32518 23767 53412 97044 02898 61951 S2108 06453 41976 359S1 27660 59973 41213 20069 60422 23414 64176 73678 07051 06986 19814 48749 16194 47918 15044 55012 21457 88717 58887 72200 50126 28989 00415 27513 94329 57820 54080 51993 59014 29789 38772 25575 81915 91156 79742 43801 30004 64617 06415 12506 73440 32803 41895 48966 93361 5602S 16361 24101 96555 39625 32369 97631 36307 04375 97543 41052 63051 22255 52082 90155 30058 30816 58551 42372 30722 24693 20316 05271 50125 51230 25282 17462 18673 60831 57341 66707 45863 88756 07198 10365 73432 19282 52125 13246 42621 71772 10149 37343 62197 73991 67575 58970 77892 54901 59065 63727 03234 04873 030 5 09942 26345 77841 87770 17372 816 51 70619 91016 99146 60351 37418 75274 12935 62430, 58625 25066 56699 56897 30241 08760 17580 03595 66161 08748 78994 52910 88000 67443 21906 16422 34363 80266 31625 33399 36467 07786 23129 08594 78612 71522 44103 S35G7 08674 57981 87422 79689 42314 84855 58134 82657 65808 99433 38766 80523 45090 17884 41699 45654 26596 97175 41388 42438 90556 03883 74699 05617 28238 33456 57137 12528 61537 24070 89138 3107 78205 02529 01299 31420 27324 72173 55S56 79224 27474 76013 20962 85026 09105 87676 88235 11973 23037 02534 82018 04285 52344 04637 43737 3C4SS 66053 05820 97885 87709 56242 620 79495 53246 8004C 11168 80208 37977 26299 63498 27865 18315 89274 55587 48160 64901 48398 25776 04395 63904 94030 06614 4490 39709 26559 23205 44442 9176 4 46536 60346 7G643 24934 950 GO 41550 65121 41581 24528 53695 27224 94064 22492 08112 26527 51093 33414 55567 79378 37534 85246 70226 62116 35022 56829 60 697 34798 18531 71886 14692 99296 00318, SECRET.  Paper No. 42 6.  13th August 194-2.  FOREIGN OFFICE -S.O.E. COMMITTEE.  UNITED STATES OF AMERICA S.Q.E. RELATIONS WITH COLONEL DONOVAN.  With reference to the conclusion reached on Item 4 of the Minutes of the Seventh Meeting the following copy of a letter from Brigadier Hollis to Sir C. Hambro is circulated for the information of members of the Committee.   Signed P.N.LOXLEY.  FOREIGN-OFFICE S. W. 1.  13th August 1942.  Letter dated 9th August 1942 from Brigadier Hollis to Sir C. Hambro.  Reference your letter of 26th June and subsequent correspondence about joint Anglo-American S. 0. E. collaboration  The Chiefs of Staff are desirous that S.O.E. should collaborate with the Americans in so far as the security of British Secret Service interests permit with the object of ensuring unification of policy. The Chiefs of Staff are I am sure. prepared to leave it to S.O.E. to agree with the Americans the necessary machinery to give effect to the necessary collaboration bearing in mind''that the interests of His Majesty's Government throughout the world are of first importance., GibSIVR ft If'  GPT/S7 19th 3 am 1942  75. fl  jj m. / Many thanks indeed for your letter of the 1st August whleh I have treated as you requested. It was most useful in giving me the necessary background and atmosphere on your side of th water both in New York and In Washington.  The situation as you describe it in New York la on th whole substantially what I expected. The line which G.h. is taking is also what I would have expected and I think he is right.  does not seem at the moment to be anything we can do from here to help except   a bear in mind the absolute necessity of giving CUM. the maximum support and never saying anything which could by any chance give the impression however unintentionally of lack of confidence in him. This has been very carefully noted here and we will act accordingly.  b address all telegrams to G. . . even if they are  for G. This will be a rule in the Missions  J henceforth and I shall do ay best to get G.D. to adopt the some practice.  As regards Washington pleas assure G.M. that wo fully appreciate his position and we quite understand the difficulty of trying to build up his own   relationship with 0.50 000 and that of the Mission generally with G.5O 0QO s organisation if we are continually screaming about breaches of the agreement which are at the most only threatening. I am quite -laaepared-to ceept your view that we should not worry too much about reported intentions on th part of the American 5.O.E. which may be contrary to our interests and to the agreement but which ' G.iU In th last resource would be able to scotch with G.50 000.  At the same time you must not be upset that we should tell you quite frankly and if necessary in rather strong terms our reaction to thee reported intentions. This will not mean that w will expect you necessarily to pass on our views either immediately or with the same strength to the Americans. That is a matter for G.h. s discretion aslong as he gets th result that we want he is the Judge of the means and the tempo which he should adopt. He will constantly be confronted with th problem of balancing th effect of protests by us on his relations with 0 50 000 against the  P.T.O, risks of allowing tlae G.50 000 organisation to oomit tiienselvos In scxas oonsidsrabls degree to a line of action which la contrary to our interests I do not see however -how he can hop to strike this balance unless he gets from u a pretty clear Indication of our reactions to reported teerlcan intentions and the degree of serious-w ness of our opposition to sorao contemplated A-erican action. I hope this is quite clear If you and he do not agree with what 1 say pleas write and tell me so  We are somewhat concerned here regarding both the degree of-internal confusion in 0 50 000 3 organisation and the apparently crippling restrictions which are being imposed upon the 0 3 S by a recent Directive issued to G.50 000 and telegraphed to 0 0 3 by'J 5 K. Washington in J S M. 350 of 12 8 42. 1 entirely share your view that however tiresome the O.S.S may be at present and whatever diffi culties they may cuase by rushing-into natters which they do not underatand it would be wholly contrary to the interests of .O.K. if anything serious were to happen to 0.50 000 or his organisation .g. if they wort wound up or portitlono fc or even hopelessly crippled  is no special news to give you from. Imre -or   to put it the other way there is far too much even to begin to write It. At any rate there have been no disasters lately nor anything to worry me real y seriously.  Please give our very best to G.b and assure him of our absolutely-unlimited confidence. At a recent meeting at the Foreign Office the whole assembled body of Assistant under Secretaries broke out into a song of praise of him  Pleas remember ms to all the other members of the Mission and particularly to the old Master.  1 0    4., U/XX/2222.  To A.D. through AD/U  I sent a copy of that part of the revised version of the Progress Report applicable to 0/00 0 's section to M.G. and a copy of the full report to AD/P asking for authority to despatch to New York.  I have been informed since by M.G. that 0/00 0 has written to 0.0. stating that he does not feel that we are justified in sending any reports of this nature to New York.  f Z/wC T\kinM r . f mj-\, PERSONAL.  ADP/US/18S3 21.8.4S  TO A.D. FROM AD/P.  I send back herewith the condensed Progress Report which 0. sent to me and which I have examined myself and had examined by the security people. I have already expressed rather strong views about the despatch of a report of this nature to G.M. and am most anxious naturally not to appear obstructive but quite frankly I cannot see any object in sending the majority of the revised report in order to interest G.M. and I am prepared to make a case if it is necessary for reference to D/CD A and/or C.D.  I have pencilled lightly those parts which I consider should not be sent though some are naturally on the border line.  I think you said that G.M. would Squire documents of this sort for his own information but the tendency always is I think to pass on interesting snippets whereas surely his functions are not the transmission of snippets but guidance on main lines of any organisation which eventually may be established in U.S.A. Many of the items in the attached paper seem to be merely of gossipy or passing interest and I repeat I think it is a mistake to send them., mss&m 1. m&m  saloli Gcoaittee. At a . etlne on 29th July it m.8 decided that Mr. QbxiefeaeuB Mollex should ho kept advised of all political natters hut not crje itional matters 2 3.125 Ho flights in the Air Transport Service to or frost Suedes  n/ have taken place. 3. ]LM nil.  c' 4. sszm. /-vw x // A-v-4 jA  13m organiser in LirriE EAST is notr working a wn opertinu Fro' sols are goofer. -liiaso fwoft lato-itffffyglA-wte 4ovel 5inc and tore proim anda and sabotage insjfcructions ore being carried k .w' .  5. an. 6. Qwswimicatlcaas have icf rovefc sffiiN Mff .set- ' 'ii9S OSlUL Gonfinaction of sabotage of aeroplanes a drawbridge and an aeroplane work has been received.  T mJ3L Betas has been received of hAHSSL sd FAUL HSTNABS. Sfe hsve be f dBpi to InvaetiQate pengsiMlity of jPermcT -escape. mix Q0I3HI Hi liUTirTH Biswutnil IrriUhr ipiiliii Tl m libTiilfi r east has arrived in Xhgland. Parcel deaoetch oontinuee and neos has been received that all parcels hears so far reached their destinations. Average tine of delivery ms three weeks. m organiser is bsi -..tzainsd to work UaesU e WB&KBM, a.  HU. 9. Colonel Snrvftls ha goasa to SZ3D0UE XAAf to study soxfctng and tminiugt and a rspsoscsatatlvs of his Is gBiag to SX&U&ISM to ooafa taith AS/W. of tliis visit as hois of hls fflyitaots Ath MM8I9 '3t iricsiy V  io.   ] 7 m reception of out lisa at COCA 1ms b&m asraxu od hT anfl mterial sill be amt from 3\UTZBlUC1D. 11. PG1A15 Ifil. r T ' nil. '  13. ujLiMmm 14. Tbs Aalw sasrioyis visit reoea&ly to ou two oMef oontaots  i with the Traditicsaalists has brought the latter unde suspicion.  15. %mmk Our nm representative 1ms not yet loft for USBOrf. 16. Gmif'Urm ud, 3   i7.   a Mil... diMlQA yfXQdt. rrs gemnts far pmtmmel of pafOjMiBawfai a3.ssion at AOCSm and LAGOS are being made.  b A Portuguese organisation with capital of  100 000 h& hem formed to purobase and exp&xt wub&mc. It it offering 15 Angolaree per lb. which is higher than the price that our eoEtmiry Is paying. A-plan to try and uncorer OasifcAS diamnd siauisgliag orfsaaiaatitms in LI os is being nut twfca- oration von LQhiiDA.   e CSHMA. W. / qvb1qC the appointment of an 0 0. yice Consul at BISSAU in replacement of ADAMS has been Contacts with Chinese Co amiist in MALAYA are being deve loped from HIDIA  jWBMIITig stora no sign of co-operation with our personnel.  19. I IA  a The G-ia-C. has decided that guerillas operating in territory under British control or in close co-operation with our forces should be the responsibility of M.0. Director te of O.H.a. Those opernting la enei occunied territory not in direct co-operation with our force shall be xinder 3.0  b Ap/0 M asen ingEtrwct i to to A\0i i% ih . he Pas teadscJ. over to L-t.-Solonel Beyt .  e Indian Mission has informed London that the following activities are being carried out now t 1 Training of Indian Communists for nost-oocupatlonal sabotage.  li Intensified development rumour propaganda.  ill Assistance to the Dutch with supplies and training., HK   . Or misction in C4L0UTTA area of Ohlnese OoKramiots awl Waalls for ra-eiitry Into l ALAfA.  v organisation of S.0 1. work in MO'A.  yi Organisation of work in SIM %& eenjwsrctlon with Oolaul few.  -fhe Indian Hission haw been Infozswd that hem&an haws in Mind the ap. ointejent of an experienced officer to take charge under the head of the Indian Mission of these and airtilar activi ties outside India. ht.-OtiiO/tsi John 6 d who is return 1 0 to this is being considered for this nurpose. It s b m  ... .... .u arrangett that Lt.-Col. fodd and ht.-Ool. Beyts should sect ia  muto dismissmm  20. d 'o r report the followlag operations   i    a Apaety has been establiched in the AMU I3MASDS is being established and plans are faade to  b A party has been established in TIMOR with direct coaisunications with MAR9ZK. o . a Parties ar le vlng for hAO and 0MAMAMA la SEW OUI3EA.   d A party 1 being formod for JAVA. Projects are being lield up for mat of wlreleso etplpuenl.  21. T m DALMHM  a wmim& Two operations took place alien personnel and stores wens dropped to General Mihajlovio. Agents were draped ipuocesefblly and Bom stores although in cits case the stores were scattered over a large area. A further o eratioji which had been planned was cancelled at tbs request of the General as hs had been forced to wove OAIRO state that they are pluming a large number of sorties during the next moon h f byplaice and soMprine xm the Adriatic. These have the a provBl of the, -5   8 Croats recruited in the U.s are being trained for pene tration into CROATIA at the end of this year. \ General Uihajlcnrie informs us he is in contact with iluharraa Xiaj Jctar and ve hate asked him to send this group all help and eneouragemjant.  d ChhSCS Cur new wireless station -has been discovered by the Gestapo. and the-operator t ptu ed. Tha life of tide etation sae only As a result q& tids we have CidLy one station standing by and-ia-viW of thb bbvlcaaa coneUntratad t iW-agri'-tor -/v WW&mti&k IM liMi MMmb tyfiji tefe ao i. ot e3tobliBjbe f'f howevert on one 4 y and iiifur sation ma .received thftt. Xfurfeher ne er of our agents ar i our collaborator had been arrected Motrithstandipg thie it tos reported that a second group had been fortaed aad we are ashed fos a fresh sapiily ofj dsloslvos and Itoeta. A party mm-despatched atj the eua of J y. Zta min obltjirec are-to eontaet tise KdiAill crganiaatieiin to infil  f' r trete Oredte-epcaMni Jexbs into YUGOSLAVIA to link with General iiiha lovic. R It is eapccted that tMa mrty will take a f&rtwiaht to reach It fifiuati ti r wT George MaPATlS one of the wmerts of the Bai fe of CHIOS whidt is oollabors iag with win the provision of funds has egGg ed' ftMBi Qreeee and is m -his way to smywia Finoixclal Arrm enento. The first meting of the Anglo-Greek Committee was held at CAIRO on 28th July with A /H in the Chair. All previous, financial support to Greek organisations sas approved / HflBfl' -Ho cation Qt the 150-j'OG -grant.- 6S agree4-up u  e OOLYS Supplies sere dropped oa tsu occasiona. On tfteiKNwrt occasion stgaals sere seen feat not a. tta eecea UeKi\ii 4nfomatlM regar41ng Axis relaforceestnta for LIBYA been received frsm tec 'Ci r iAucHes.  fUllODMIlA A new 10-2tlaute Roumanian broadcast has been started by us  in the MUCUS SASf on the 27 m. band at 21 25 hours local Palestine time.  It Jiaa been approved lap-W that the LARKS Air Line should establish an air service between BUOiARKSRP and ISTANBUL . Hhbs mnAft-0 -&rRI m r 4he-line na opportunity of ccaiiig out an& ooBftactlwg us and eaplorlirg the. poselblllty of f etting up a eet onMe property. % /   a mm. It was agreed by YP Istanbul that we should fora di aps of esploeives and incendiaries at 3MIRHA for the eventual destruction  of goods ptirchased. by the U.K.O.O. YP The first post-occupational sabotage organisation MU con sist of a mobile field Headquarters and 6 Regional Cowmaders controlling betimen them 2 cells each 5 strong.   o SYRIA Syria is organiMd now quite separately from PALK yiHE. Plans are being made for post-occupational sabotage gangs in the TRIPOLI LATAKIA DAJl/JCUiJ ALKPPOandotherareas. TheyMM1 C centrelied by wireless by Field Headquarters v&iU i JtertJ m aaaBBK .,  7    gasiaiA Traiaiag of Amm&ma and f r ana fox noxl in PISR9IA oontinues. 3 /f -s ts ax balne sent into FMSIA iaraediately and a er IHR Mii MMm traliied. Mid 52aat hav 'been asket to prooeec with theiar plan to hex ..  f mmA . Mid ftaat lia e been asked to proofed with the foaanatlon f a .K oxgaaisations thxou out these areas with speelal m hasls  a f/f cGimamications.  3. Kba- lA  ar head agent 'n ..IB ISiSK -' th 3N Lf and eipeots t return to MOSGOW & pg W V v The Russian authorities are pressing us tlsrisfr gepuegt to introduce their a ats into lorthersi 1TALT. This Is being dismissed as. it my entail a sea landing in Unoccupied France as one of their agents cannot Jmap v b A -A-fter 3 nonttis preparatory work it Ms been arranged that  La TurmAie an evening pmes mblisJied ia fmmh9 rill appear in This ted Skaagsa s et--entity by tM im mm  &, 22nd August 1942  TO C.D. PROMs A/D. Copies to D/CD A D/CD 0 D/PIN A/J Z D/HV Caesar A/DU A/DP D/CE M.S. M.X. D/R.  I attach hereto a note which has been prepared by A/DU setting out the substance of recent developments in connection with G.50 000ts charter and organisation.  -oQo, copy  G.50 OOO ORGANICATIOH . 0 M .-.. At GOJ IROL w. Ol'iVITXRO Jnder the latest directive issued by the Araar5.can J.C S to the 0 G.S its functions arid powers have been defined clearly.. Oenarally speaking O.S.S. has been put directly under control of the Joint Psychological Warfare Goi'urdttee J.P. .0. . G.50 000 is Chairman of this Oomiitteo but the ... Department of the War Departraent the D.h.I the Oper. tldns Departnont of the War Department and the Plans Division of the otaff of the C -in 0 arc also represented. In the directive It is stated  a All plans for action by O.S.5. will bo submitted to the J.U.b. through the J.P.W.C.  b No cornitenants will be made by 0.1.S to foreign Govern ments or agencies on plans or projects prior to the approval of the J.O.S  o Direct liaison will bo maintained with military or other Government agencies involved in. the execution of approved plans.  d In theatres of operations or in operational areas of Task forces all officers and agents of O.S.S will be under the direct control of Theatre or Task force Commanders. O.S.S will not engage in any activity which has not been approved by the J.C.S. and/or the Theatre Oornnander. In -theatres of operations therefore all O.S.S activities will be under the control of the Theatre Gcm'ii&iider elsewhere all plans must first of all be approved by the J.P.h.G. and the J.C.S Presumably 6 50 000 as Chairman of the f P W G can refer a project turned down by J.P.W.C to the J.CS . B KhQ8GAgXSAlIQH. x There appears to be in progress a complete reorganisation of the .0. branch of Q 5 S  Colonel Goodfellow who was In charge of S.O. has beeii made a Deputy Director of 0.5.G and has been placed in charge  of ell purely military activities of O.S S.B G M interprets this to mean that Goodfellow will In future look after the guerilla ccaamando side of 0 . Lt.-Col. Huntingdon -who until now has been Security Officer for the whole ox J.C.S. hes been designated his successor. The latter in an interview with G.M stated that in Ms view Goodfellow had been working upon the wrong lines and had been creating a guerilla organisation rather than an S.O. H Huntingdon intended to start anew completely and with the exception of one man. Commander Vanderbilt would hand all the existing B 0. organisation over to the guerilla side of 0 5.5 Att he same time we are advised that Lt.-Col. Garland Williams who had been in charge of training was leaving the O.S.S. and no successor is designated., As Lomgfcingdon In Ms interview with O.M intimated that the existing training arraiigouent of the 3.0. aide would have to be drastically revised if not scrapped this does not appear to affect the situation a iy aat deal.  In brief the situation ixi regard to 0.3.S. 3.0 branch appears to be that aJ.l existing organisations such as they are will be handed over to the guerilla side . A new chief who has not had my S.O. training takes over .with one assistant of whom our hew York office has always spoken very highly. It' is not clear as to whether any or all of the various American officers who have or are being trained here will remain in the new 3.0. organisation or not. A cable has -teen sent to clarify this  It must 1-fear be assumed that starting again from scratch it will take a considerable time to build up any sort of 3.0. organisation especially as wo know that there never has been even the nucleus of head Office organisation in Washington.  On the erdit side however it can be assumed that It will be much easier for G.L. and the wainingtan liaison party to influence and guide a new organisation as it is being formed and that in the. long run it will be probably to our advantage inasmuch as a prooor .0. will be created controlled by men who think in terras of S.O. work and not in terns of ar led thuggery upon an Empire State building scale.  s, COP 1%  0 60 000 G&GA.1IS ATI OK.  0 T- L Cnfier taa latest dlreotlTO iaaued by the AaBricar. J.C. to the J T S Its fumstlosai me'-hum been defined oleerly orelXy spaftking 0 t s h b&m. pat directly wider control .  of the Joint Peychologiool rfea e 0 0 00 Is CSiairaan il Cowaittee l ut tl'.f-...t  f the SUP Peperts at t&e w er&tiosm Pepsi tneafe of the war Pepaptsaont.&the Plane Bivisicn of the staff of the G -ln C are also represented .. la the directly it is stated  m Ail pleas for action by ill be sulsaiite4 to tli J C S thi --nijti tlse J . -j  b So oo'-jnltensnts will be made by b fe S to PorelgaOovensaeats or agencies oa pleas or projects prior to the approval of the  c firect liaison will be aalntalned with ailitary or other Oovernsacat agoaeiea Involved in the execution of ftp roved plans Cd in thestres at operations or in operational area of . task forme all-officers m . agent el .' will be trades the direct Control f theatre or task fore Omtamdora 1. .1. will ofc engage In any activitywhich has -not been approved by the J w f and/orthe Sbeatre losaeaier la thsatra of operatioaa tzjerafort an r S activities will be aM r the control of the llieatro Cor-saanderj alseeiiera all plane must first of all be approved by the asd the 1 0 1 Praeuawhly0 S0 O0d as C3salmao of the J G can refer a project turned down by J.r.o.G to-the J 0 S It There appear to be in pre pe a sosaplet raorgmiiaatlonof the S 0 branoJi of d Oolanei Goodfellow sfoo waa in charge of has bean isade a -aputy Director of t . . s mwi tsa been placed In chcrga   of all purely ailifesry activitiaa of d  S Q . Interpretsthis t man that Ocodfello will' in future look after the gmrtVL eoenaato aid of a ii s -t -Gol liuntingdion 'until now lias been Security Officer for tiw whole of 0 S S has been deaigi.isted his successor ie latter in an interview with 0 M stated that la Ms view dcodfellew i ad been working upon the wrong lines and had baan creating a-guerialla organisation  rattier aisn an i-.O i.untingekm intended to start aaew completely sml with he exception of on aon Qmmwn&GT Vajiderbilfc would btosA ell the existing S a organisation over to the Guerilla aide of 0 B S At the sate btm we arc advised that h G X Oarlaad wtlt I'y. ite had 'tmm in ehargt of training was leavin, 2   a and no ummmov i && hungtla ton lu Uls interviow with '0 i5 IntlsiAtef that %Xm xl tlog trainlii uT&ii K- ar t of the S u aid would have to l draatloftll revlewd If mfe eora . to affect the alt.-st.loa & great deal tills does not p r In brief the situation Ir regard to s S ... ba s.osh appears to i that all eatletizig orgaaleatlona such tl sr are will be headed over to tl' guerilla side 1. A new chief s&o had .ot had maj training takes ever with one sealotantt of whoci our ilew Yorte office has always spoken' very highly -fc is r t clear as to whether any r ail of the various i rioan. .officers tdjo have or are leirh. tralnei Jsere will rea&in tr-t new i organisation or not A coble he been sent to clarify this It mst X fear is asauaed that starting again fro serateh it will take a o-'-nalderable tiias to build up my sort of r ar nle&tion aspeelally as we loaev ttoet there never Isas been ever the nucleus of I a d office organlestion in washingten un t i credit side however it sen be aaauoied that It will be jueh eaaler for 0 . and tie Saslilngton liaison party to InSlvtmm and pide a organisation as it e being foraed sod that la the long run it wl3h be r Otfilily to our advijotece iaas&iufih as a proper ' u will be created controlled by ma who think in terwe of . . . wcr mn -t ta terns of arsaed thuggery upon m Itepire state buildiiig eeal o, DCD0/12Q5 'C I 28 8.42. To C.D. Proa D/GD 0  Copies to S.&nd SH By arrangement with General dansteen 1 took Colonel Guenther to see Mis this morning as apparently the Americans have raised with the Norwegian representatives in the United States the possibility of evacuating a certain number of Norwegian officers from Stockholm in order to embody thorn in tiie Norwegian Nationalist Unit that is being raised In the United tatas.  I took the opportunity of pointing out that the first practical difficulty WAS the question of aircraft %and suggested to Colonel Guenther that he should press'for a certain number of American aircraft to be used on the Stockholm line in addition to our own and the Swedish.  General Hartsteen and rayself questioned Colonel Guenther on the actual use that was to be made of these officers whether they were to bo used as Oonbatanfc Officers or. Inter preters whether they were to retain their Norwegian citizen ship or take on American citizenship or what. General Hansteen agreed with Colonel Guenther that. If any were' suitable for it they could well be used even to ' 0 - ttnct platoons axkl companies. General Hanstee was anxious to know whether Colonel Guenther .foresaw tills Unit supplying men for S.O.U work and whether the Americans Intended to undertake that' type of work generally in Norway. I pointed  .out here that we had a definite agreement with Colonel Donovan and Colonel Goodfellow that no work would be under taken by the Americans In Norway without tt ootiv co-ordinated fully both with us and the Norwegians through the Am-lo- Korweglan Committee so' that there wduld oe no possibilityof confusion and also so that the Norwegiah Gmsttmmt might know exactly what was happening or being -planned for their own country. Colonel Guenther confirmed that this was the erel policy and I suggested that the best means of Implementing it was when the time earns for an American officer to ait on. the Ang1cEorweg1an ommittee. Colonel  .Guenther did point out however that the primary purpose of this Nationalist Unit was to be useu in conjunction with & proper military invasion of Norway. Colonel Guenther and General Hansteen are old friends they were both I .A. s in pre-war days in trie Baltic states so know eachother well. The up-shot of the saectin . was that Colonel Guenther would first press for American partici pation in extending facilities for Stockholm flights officers and sergeants could then be brought over here from Norway and from them would be picked such men as would volunteer and were suitable for embodiment in such a unit. ., Reference cable Ho.OJOl from Cairo Para. H ffe have already asked Hew York to clarify the position of Parker and Gordon our 333 of 2nd July . The answer which came on 10th July in cable 439 was as follows   PARA. A. GORDON IS A F.I.S. MAH AND N0 LONGER RESPONSIBLE TO G.50 000.  PARA. B. PARKER IS BEING TAKEN OVER BY  G.50 000 FOR S.I.S. PURPOSES.  It looks as if both O.W.I. late F.I.S. and the S.I.S. branch of O.S.S. may be indulging in a little S.O. work on their own.  V-   K, \ u.  2nd August 1342  TOs C D fSSM VD Co ies to D/C2 A D/CD 0  Ceescr  X attach hereto a note which has htea prepax ed by setting out the substance or recent Sevelop onta in conn.ection with c 5 000 a charter c d erganl8etion, i. . Co s fi UarSer She latest dl ctii laauaiJ by the MmAem J i ' % tba b b S Ita ivtmtlcm saci Bowifa haw h aa 4a lna4 ol a lj QimvmU -spaakliHi a r . r has be a ut directly ctr fap cntr of tl Joist Pay &olosioal -arfaro c ralttoo Cd r . c 0 &j 3OJ I Q..ali ms ojT shle bo-siitteo Uit ai.pai% jat of tl- - S b 3 H teSs Sfc tfctt th -y-tfatlois ' pfir cu sifc of Km & i' leas SIirI lo of tfei staff of ib C - ta C Ni alao jpe raat-rttcd In the it Is atatadf . Ca &11 AiMl 1--' cyjt'oa by . . will e esimitted to' tl S 3 mS v the 4 ' v Cb So eossrsi.fts t will be &mSm by b i f to bmmtmi Qomrmm-ixtM or agsaoioa an plana or prejoots prior to tLe &PP owd f tl J c y C lireet ltad &n trill W jaaiatal d with allisary ca5 otiiar Qmmvwmnb. iavolwod i Mu sufei a of ftp. rciiwad ylasa Cd In thoatraa of operetioas or is opwr&iieaal . es of f&sk feawos all ffietr jtd s niitt of i ' -. will fea mtimv tta direct c .-.-troi of Srsoatro or raeS ' po domaadara 1. .. will not M any aetlwityalticfc. h&a act hooa approiwl by aj 1 / m nM/mth TSm tm Im of ipMMMMI all s astlwitlao will be til ttctatrol of IS ttmmtm  ismgbemt all pi&sm immt fir t of sH Imi th f. r 5 c. mM -'res iy  %9d wlialrs a of il f f c m0m. e  pi e icli teamiii % J.m.c te the j c s JOSilSIamm - filers sypsera to bs Sm oro o a raorfKolaatipaof Mia i o bramii of o S S Ck l a i Ooodfallcwr ifeo is cher e of f l baa beon s&de is -opuHf' director f a 5 skS hftft baazi pXaood Is cl-nr e  of ell pyrely ullitery mt%%rl%tm f  o interpret fchie fe .e i ts t floodfoilcw ill is fatsr look after the gisarlHii ec roaMo side f n o .t C X l iwittsplaaj ho astil ass b b - s Sscurifcf Offloor for the wis l . of d S' S lifts toes dasi ifttecl hi eucoeaoor. She latter la a latervlew olth 0 M. oteted Uaifc Is Mi lew doodfelioo M toes oorklsg upon tis wroag Uses Ml Mi been cr atistg ya riell cs g 2tli tlsis r tis r Sfass tti . 1 ISi f tlagtes iatosded te start &asw  cssplofcely 9d with the M ptl a of otse mas J&ssEaiaicStr  id rbili wo US 'U&nb fell th ftiefeias t-u % jiia tisa over U fe Qiserilli aide of l ' . n ' At Mi mo t Isa mi ere edvieed that % -C l O&rXand iflifilKty Ms Is if trainlnn efts 1 ii 1.i j Mi, 3m ' find a Eue-g-fflsatfo i aeslgiwstfid it i. i tin dcn in his MAoTvi&w itL I .f tb& fcsistlA triiniiiiX e5 &-. t. -i ' t f tla .. lilOo ' uld lasv to '6 etlecU rfivtfifid if ers tliia dafi . t to true sitw&tic '. jpe. l -i &l  In brifiT the .sita tier is rr- gkrd to brcaitii rr t.. -r \ . ..i ii. om mah m tt&y fire will b fcartdfid ever ts tbo gueriils si4t . A oe chi f Ao . . fcJP&tiUag ttt-sses rv r witlt o t fifilst xstf . . - . he. . r It  Is net slsfcs to whetUts my or all of the vfirlout -scrlote who lafiw i -k ieiaet fii wxS ttKPS oiffisifii i tbs  msw -4 orrgnlsktioa or r vt -c.-tble irss r a a.ot to clarify tff s.  It oust a fear b Msuawa that -startiag a ala frcaa  sdrst t it will take a eorsai-lsriitle tim to bulM up my aort of orgmlfifitiori espsctaliy a w iaiew ttiai thsi W Ims ts if eiN n tbs ausle-is oi read argaalfifittoa in w siiij gto.iu.  on. th credit sid bcWver it can t ae x .-w4 that. It  ill. NMJMSIP P 6 . fa... .. -i ' l.is i arty to iriflufihce jvi u.u. o a as m it is feeisg forsssa mi liiAt la t&e lfib m It will ro -. our fit.. lafisxijuali a pro ill be weated cc eroiled by tsea itoo Isbiak in terktfi of '. work u. not in tarns of armA thuggery upos i' kt-. tN ilsog sosls, G.50 000 0RGMISATI0H  O.S.S.  A. SCOPE AW CONTROL OF ACTIVITIES Under the latest directive issued by the American J.0.8. to the O.S.S. its functions and powers have been defined clearly. Generally speaking O.S.S has been put directly under control of the Joint Psychological Warfare Committee J.P.W.C. . G.50 000 is Chairman of this Committee but the M.I. Department of the War Department the D.H.I the Operations Department of the War Department and the Plans Division of the staff of the C.-in-C. are also represented.  In the directive it is stated   a All plans for action by O.S.S. will be submitted to the J.C.S. through the J.P.W.C  b Ho commitments will be made by O.S.S. to Foreign Govern ments or agencies on plans or projects prior to the approval of the J.G.S  c Direct liaison will be maintained with military or other Government agencies involved in the execution of approved plans.  d In theatres of operations or in operational areas of Task forces all officers and agents of O.S.S. will be under the direct control of Theatre or Task Force Commanders. O.S.S. will not engage in any activity which has not been approved by the J.C.S. and/or the Theatre Commander. In theatres of operations therefore all O.S.S. activi ties will be under the control of the Theatre Commander elsewhere all plans must first of all be approved by the  J.P.W.0. and the J.C.S. Presumably G.50 000 as Chairman of the J.P.W.C. can refer a project turned down by J.P.W.C. to the J.C.S. B. REORGANISATION There appears to be in progress a complete reorganisation  of the S.O. branch of O.S.S, -2'  Colonel Goodfellow who was in charge of S.O. has been made a Deputy Director of O.S.S. and has been placed in charge  of all purely military activities of O.S.S. 0.11. interprets this to mean that Goodfellow will in future look after the guerilla commando side of O.S.S. Lt.-Ool. Huntingdon who until now has been Security Officer for the whole of O.S.S. has been designated his successor. The latter in an interview with G.M. stated that in his view Goodfellow had been working upon the wrong lines and had been creating a guerilla organisation gather than an S.O. He Huntingdon intended to start anew completely and with the exception of one man Commander Vanderbilt would hand all the existing S.O. organisation over to the guerilla  side of O.S.S.  At the same time we are advised that Lt.-Col. Garland  Williams who had been in charge of training was leaving the  O.S.S. and no successor is designated. As Huntingdon in his interview with G.M. intimated that the existing training arrangement of the S.O. side would have to be drastically revised if not scrapped this does not appear to affect the situation a great deal.  In brief the situation in regard to O.S.S. S.O. branch  appears to be that all existing organisations such as they are  will be handed over to the guerilla side . A new chief who  has not had any S.O. training takes over with one assistant of  whom our Hew York office has always spoken very highly. It is  not clear as to whether any or all of the various American  officers who have or are being trained here will remain in the  new S.O. organisation or not. A cable has been sent to clarify  this.  It must I fear be assumed that starting again from scratch it will take a considerable time to build up any sort of S.O. organisation especially as we know that there never has been even the nucleus of Head Office organisation in Washington., -3-  On the credit side however it can be assumed that it will be much easier for G.M. and the Washington liaison party to influ ence and guide a new organisation as it is being formed and that in the long run it will be probably to our advantage inasmuch as a proper S.O. will be created controlled by men who think in terms of S.O. work and not in terms of armed thuggery upon an Empire State building scale.  20.8.42., C JPY  CIPHER TELEGRM RECEIVED PROM HEW YORK. DEEP 20 8.42. RECD. 20.0 42 Ho 07529 To Mr. K sv..Tick for Colonel Taylor from Louis Franck Further to my telecram 60 to Sir Charlss Hombro.  A. Your telegram 919 para B. have requested Colonel Donovan to advise his London representative the1 agreement has been ratified and that he is at liberty to discuss with you any points that might arise. B. Your Para C noted but In viow of Washington s formal ratification I hope it will be possible for you to get similar formal ratification from Our Chiefs of S aff as we may be called upon to change ratifications. C. Regarding F.0. Amondmentc if you do not think these are - Important wo are strongly of opinion that they should be abandoned as if.Insisted upon it will mean a further delay In putting agreement into operation. Moreover it may lead to O.S.S. or U.5.A. Chiefs of Staff alee wishing to put forward amendj&snts D. P.O. s objection to description applying to Burma is answered in ratified summary which'included Burma in category of Joint assighment of territories 'This phraseology should give C.O.f. Liaison Mission here opportunity of protecting our interests should necessity arise but we are of opinion to let sleeeping dogs lie.  L E. Regarding specific allocation of spheres which should be reviewei in light of developments of military situation this app/cars to be . covered by accepted principles underlying agreement and GRP MOT made in ratified summary in notes follow ng sub paragraph four of paragraph C. which envisages alterations in accordance changing predominancy. Ft our para. D. regarding Chino there is nothing to be done until Colonel Donovan s organisation gets going. Points you raise noted and agreed.  G. Your para E. will wire later Colonel Donovan s reaction II. Your para F. and G. noted., COPY  CIPHER TELEGRM DESPATCHED TO HEW YORK 20 .8.42.  NO. 2952 /5.  TELEGR/J.1S 701/2 CAIRO TO LOEEa WERE QUOTED VEnOATIi  WITH THE FOLLOWING CpE ENYE  Wg had howevor previously hoard from Lord C-ionconncr regarding the aircraft nos Hon for S.O.E. Riddle East. Lord C-lenccnnar points out that cardinal factor is that Wellingtons from bomber pool can be used for brief sorties but sorties to Jugoslavia can only be undertaken by Liberators specially adapted so shat they cannot be used for other operations. Consequently A.O. C.-in. G. is not in favour of Americans using their Liberators for sorties to the Balkans. Further more A.O. c.-in-c believes that Americans could only get aircraft as a political stunt and. on strength of our using them for Jugoslavia. He would not therefore look on Colonel Donovan s machines as extra to total number in Middle East but as a deduction from number that would otherwise be available for routine operations. We agree with Lord C-lenconnor s tabgram and suggest that you got Colonel Donovan to telegraph to Captain Robert Lov/ to the effect that he should submit to Lord Gleneonnor s authority until real Head of i 'scion arrives. Furthermore that Captain Robert Low must not repeat not initiate any plans without Lord Glenconncr1s ap roval.  V e also view with some anxiety the suggestion that Americans 'should drop their own personnel to Eihajlovic particularly in view of the Jugoslav Army crMs in Egypt where Mirkovie and other rebel officers are only too likely to play off British and Americans.  Ploso telegraph what action is taken., CIPHER TELEGRAR HSCE2YBD Fm EE's YORi Hr. OG9. 28. S. 42. Follosdnr for Sir Cliarles Hambro from Colonel Franck. A. Have boon officially informed by our Joint Staff Ilission T'asiiinrton that Joint United States Chiefs of Staff have ap rovod sujrm ry prepared by United States Jo nt Planners of London agreement. B. Suncjary is docuniaat of about 500 words -hich accurately represents sense of agreement. Actu 1 texi will bo brougiit to you. C. Only co-meat an agrocmant is recaendatioa by Joint Psycliological ITarfare CoEaaittoe that agreement vdll be entered into concerning Spain and Portugal in near future. B. \s agreement lias nor.-bocm ratified by United States C.Q.S. I regard it as most important that the oreign Office should not delay farther in assenting formally to agreement., COPY  CIPHER fELEGR&I DESPATCHED TO US'-YORK- 25. 8 . 42.  2919 2920 and 2921.  Following for Col. Franck frou Mr. Keswick  A. Generally very litllo progress has boo made in carrying out provisions of agreemont chiefly because Colonel Donovan's organia lion apparently roanins in embryo condition both at Headquarters and in the Hold. B. Colonel Donovan's representatives here have never discussed with us again this agreement and we still await Colonel Donovan's confirmation and ratification which lie promised after submission to A. and State Department. C. he have submitted agreement to our own Chiefs of Staff and to Foreign Office. Foynor have given blessing which is rather vague but which definitely authorises us to go ahead with execution of the agreement. Foreign Office have so far suggested on. two very minor amendments. Firstly description of Burma as British sphere into which 0.3 .S. free to work from China instead of as Ho-Man's land. Secondly more explicit provision that allocation of spheres open to review in light of development of military situation. Foroign Office advise us they have some further minor suggestions to make but we. can safely assume no material change will be proposed. D. 1. S.O.para-military activities in B. have almost been reduced to nothing more due to C opposition than to policy of handing over to Colon-el Donovan. 2. Our other S .0. activities are almost wholly confined to R.I.I. and until Colonel Donovan -decides on his set up in B. presumably after S's report it is surely unwise to contemplate still further reduction as atpresentthere isvirtuillySoColor elDonovanorganisationinB.with which to liaiso. 3. Whatever organisation Colonel Donovan is eventually able to set up in B. wo do not contemplate withdrawing our secret support of the C secret organisation centred in R.i.I. in which E is also interested bat on S.O. para-military side we will submit to lead of Colonel Donovan and will set up lialscm specially in regard to stores and co-operation with oar P. T. 0., 2  Mission in F. from Tsihere it has been agreed Colonel Donovan should not operate.  4. Lt.Col. John Keswick can fully explain situation. E. Position regardind Cape Vordo is still as indicated in our telegram We fully recognise that wo have no right ur.der agreement to establish representative at Capo ITord except as iaioor. Mission with merican Mission. Wo would however like you to put it to Colonel Donovan that the 'foreign Office are appointing vice Consul to Capo Verde and have given us the chance of nominating a ran. s it would clearly bo in interest of both organisations tint British Vice Consul in Cape Verde should be S.O.h. minded we would like his permission to go ahead with scheme. hen his own Mission is established in Cape Verde Vice Consul could carry out liaison duties provided for in agreement. Please telegraph Colonel Donovan s reaction as soon as possible. F. Since Colonel Donovan has not yet so far as we know got Missions in any other Atlantic islands wo aro not laakihg any plans for appointing further liaison missions in this area at present. G. .We are obtaining necessary information from Cairo and will telegraph again as quickly as possible'. SEC MY ILhSDI 1TELY FOLLOWMG TELEGRAM.  0O0..., COPY 25. 8. 42 Cl PEEP. mSGPMi DESPATCHED TO HEY YCBK Hr. 2922. SEE m I. iHESATELY PBBCEDEiG TELE-GHC.. A. is U.s. Chiefs of Staff B. is Cliiua. C. is Ciiineso. D. is Hayden B isif.of X F. is India. ..oOo..., CIPHER IEL3GRAR FROH CAIRO- 25. 8. 42 Hr. 0701 Following from Lord Glencaimer. A.  It may of courso be that there is some secret u derstandin Captain Robert Low and Washington. Hy i ipression is that Capt. Robert Low believes i -trying to get on by getting things done. Hone though he is on his own admission in reality only liaison officer attached to this mission he is initiating plans of his own on strength of information ho learns from us and other sources and Ms contact with General Brereton. He then telegraphs Washington for necessary equipment and personnel. B. Trouble is that though ho appears quite willing to cooperate with us he professes to be ignorant of terns of our agreement with American S.0. and states he Ms had no instructions regarding it. C. He sees no reason therefore why he should not get busy in Greece and Turkey as well'. In t nis regard he tells me ho Ms two assistants one of whom he is now proposing to said to Turkey to investigate and the other to Cyprus. D. I am prepared to regard this as harmless for the present for unless he is playing doublegame or bre ks faith with me he will not do anything without my knowledge and consent. E. It is clear that this state of affairs cannot be allowed to continue and tMt his principals must either appoint him as head of merican Lissim advising him of terms of our agreement and instruct him to negotiate with me or tactfully tell him he should submit to my authority until re&l Head of Mission arrives. This latter would be most preferable. F. It is breach of agreement and unfair on Capt. Robert Lew if his principals encourage him in his projects without giving him necessary status and keeping hli. in ignorance of true position G He also points out that A is soon to come here as Head of U ssion with his own assistants several Arabs fourteen Yugoslavs and ten Greek agents recruited and trained in United States during last three months. This would not seem to tally with out previous information or tMt in your telegram to the effect that ttAB is still preparing his own instractions. E. Finally De Chaetelaine Ms reported B and wGtt are now in Istanbul and seem to be dealing with S.O.E. matters. Capt. Low denies M tfing anything, to do with then and su cest they are noabers of Aaerioafl V hr Information Department. I would bo glad if you would oonfirm this with ashingtan. SEE LT I .-EDIiTELY FOLLOVOG TELEGR/ii, cr iiri TEL anai fioi c mro Hr. 0702. SBB MY I ATSLY PRECEDI1JG TELBGRj'ii.  An is Hoskins  3 is Gordon, iio X /i283 31 8.42. 'll- To D/3 .iX S SB J From D/CD 0  Copies to F D/liF D/F T K MP MY  1. X.   2. 2. 3. 3.3. vliSHi   x msm  It Is noceaaary to keep S 0 S Liaison Mission in Bew York informed -cncrsllj ns regardc the more important aspects of our work not from the point of view of operations we' have carried out tout rather from the general policy point of view. I have arranged with A.D. that this will now be done toy means of a monthly report prepared toy Country Sections which will give In general terms reviews of interesting happenings political tendencies and trends etc.. In the countries with which toey deal or among their govormaents here  e have ourselves i-ecelvod two interesting papers from. New York one toeing a review of the French situation and cM Gaulle and the other & statement on the Italian emigrA position in America and the ideas and position of dforza.  Country Sections will in future -when they prepare their monthly progress reports 3 prepare also a. report o i the above lines which X will send to A.D., T e m 3 you a .list of th agents abroao of 0.50 000 so far as i a too '. Fe cannot unfortmat-oly TOr'ch for Its cn-'nloto accuracy as jacvaassfes are oads without our bettvi advised in certain cases. A4dec. to this list there should be the namss of all those officers of 60 000 who are going t.hifough courses st our schools over hors. I mu collecting these faror. . and will lot yor heve then in due-course.  You will note there are no F.I.S. or 0.. .1. mou mentioned in this list G.50 000 s A /nan/ ed during the last four or five r-onths for a consiricrsble raaat'ir of old f 1.6. -new o.i ..I. -shwi to be distributed about the worid. I ac getting the list checked up by Colonel Gunther.,  aV/7   AGENT3 OP G.50.OOP.  Name Function. Remarks.  ANKARA  ROBERT PARKER 3 1. Branch 0.3.S  BAGHDADs  E. PAUL VARANDYAN S.I. Branch O.S.S. En route 15/8/42 Capetown. CAIRO  Oq q   ROBERT LOW .u o LT. C.H. McBAINE S.I. U.8.N  CHUNGKING  MAJOR EIFFLER O.S.S. So. Sent out at Stillwell's request.  TOLSTOY S.O. Branch O.S.S. 20/8/42 en route via Tibet.  DR. JOSEPH R.HAYDEN S.I. & S.O. O.S.S. To inspect and report. En route 22/8/42.   . JOHN EAIRBANKS S.I. & S.O. O.S.S Going with Hayden.  C. V. STARR S.I. Probably being sent 24/8/42. Cable No. 990 28/8/42. 6 DUBLIN  R. MARLIN 3.1 Branch of 0.3 8. LAGOS  ERWIN ROY WATTS In charge S.O Returning to Branch O.S.S. U.S.A. medical reasons 25/8/42.  A.D. HUTCHESON S.I. Branch of O.S.S. Supervisor S.I. Dakar to Angola. Coyer Research & Analysis O.S.S 5 other bodies under S.O. Panair Air cover  LIBERIA  LLOYD C. BRIGGS S.I. Branch of O.S.S. All W/T experts  and four others under control of G.50 000 repres entatives in Lagos., 2  Han Function. Remarks. LISBON CHAMBERS 3.1. Branch 0.8.S Cover A.N.A LONDON WILLIAM PHILLIPS 0.3.8. 8.1. & S.O. Rank of Minister In charge of O.S.S D. WILLIAMSON 8.1. Assistant to Minister. COL. G.B. GUENTHER S.O. Head of S.O. MAJOR R. IIEPPNER S.O. FISHER HOWE Administration 8 .0 . M S . I. MAJOR HAROID JEWEL S.I. Liaison with U.S.L.C. Marines & Coastal Command. COMMANDER JUNIUS S.I. Liaison with Z.N. MARTIN WHITNEY SHEPPARDSON S.I. STOCKHOLM HOPPER S.I. Branch O.S.S. TANGIER COL. EDDY . o.s.s. Card - crv P-Coon- DomizroosTER S.O S- XtP & s o. Alternates between S.O . Casablanca and Tangier. VICHY NICHOL StIITH O.S.S Special assistant to U.S. Y.P. -, f  AGENTS OF G.50.000. ANKARA M&m ROBERT PARKER 5 1. Branch 0.3 3. BAGHDAD E. PAUL VARAM3YAN 5 I. Branch 0 8 S. En route 15/8/41 Capetown CAIROi BQBmT UOYJ 0 J 3 LT G.li. HcBAIMB 3 1 U.S.H CHUKCaaHO MAJOR EIFFLSR 0 5 3 SO. Sent out at Stillwell 1 a ' request TOLSTOY 0 Branch 0 3.S. 20/8/42 en route via Tibet DR. JOSEPH R.HAYDKH J.I & J.O. O.O.S. To inspect aM report En route 22/8/42.  . JOBS il IRBAKKS S.I. & 5 0. 0.3 3. Going with Hayden. G.  . 5TARR S.I. Probably being sent 84/8/42. Cable lo. 890 88/8/42. DUBLIli i R. 1TARLIN S.I. Branch of 0.5.3. lAQOSt KRWIH ROY 3ATT5 In charge S.O Returning to Branch 0.3.3. U.5.A. aedical reasons 25/8/42 A.D. HUTCHE30M 3 1. Branch of 0 3.5. Supervisor 8.1. I Dakar to Angola. Cover Research & Analysis 0 3.3.  I 5 other bodies under 5.0. Pamir Air cover ....mm.mi.. .in.. . LIB3HIA LLOYD C. BRIGGS S.I. Branch of 0.8.3. All Yl/T experts and four others urder control of G.50 000 ropres entatives in togos., Item. CHAIffiKRa 3 X. BmrMlt 0 .Uo Oov A IT A .... I ' ILIJ412 VI0MF3 o.. 1 & . Ra k or in olioroe of D V'ILLX/ .L 1I 4.\  1 Asaistant to Kiiiiotop. oi . cub mmwm 0.0. Head of 3.0. mSQ2 R. laSBFJii u 0 F1BKSR BOWB MESinistswtiom  0 & o .X JiU3U KARp 2 JrJ JL 3 1 Liaiasm isith u a i .c. & Coastal Gos&mM mmMmn mma 3 x iJaiBoti dtli z K i'mnOT iSBfOT 3 i  ooiai&ui IlOFKia 0 1. Branch 0.3 3 T IIGI US \ ' .. COB. SOTJT o ls OOliAID C03TBB' j X & 3 .0 Altermtos between Ctasablanca and fangle .  XC1fl ' . lacnoL oixth 0.3 3 Special assistant to B.o. y.f., GFT/7Q. 1st September 1942v  Further to 'our telephone conversation of this afternoori I send you herewith copies of telegrams exchanged with Cairo and fdw York showing how the position regarding the Agreement with Colonel Donovan has become more and more acute until it is now evident that the sooner we clinch the deal the better.  As you agreed with me on the telephone this can best be done by authorising our Liaison Mission in Washington to exchange ratifications with Colonel Donovan s people without raising any amendments at all. The American Joint Chiefs of Staff have approved the London Agreement without amendment and this offers us the chance to get the whole thing signed sealed and delivered before any of Colonel Donovan s people can attempt to wriggle out of it. In our opinion any delay and above all any proposals for amendment on our part which would inevitably give rise to further discussion of the Agreement as a whole would be most dangerous.  The. need for the earliest possible ratification is of course best illustrated by the Middle Eastern position where it is absolutely essential that Colonel Donovan should give clear instructions to his people both in Washington end in the field within the next week or so if independent action by Captain Low in Cairo and the despatch of Hoskin s Mission from Washingtion are to be avoided. I see little chance of such instructions being given unless the London Agreement is ratified and brought into immediate operation.   . Loxley Esq. Foreign.Office., 1st September 1942.  CH/2S43  Further to our exchange of letters -mine of the 6th August and yours of the 9th August our liaison mission in ashington 1ms now been officially advised that the Joint United States Chiefs of Staff have approved the agreement between S.O.E. and O.S.S. negotiated in London during Colonel Donovan1 s recent visit. They have suggested no amendment at all and their only comment Is a recommendation that the more detailed arrangement covering Spain and Portugal forecast in the London agreement should be negotiated as soon as possible.  We are extremely anxious to bring the London agreement into operation as quickly aa possible in order to have a firm hold on the proposed activities of Colonel Donovan s organisation in various parts of the world and it is therefore a matter of urgency that the ratification by our respective Chiefs of Staff should be exchanged at the earliest possible moment.  In authorising our liaison mission in Washington to proceed with this exchange of ratifica tions w should like to give them some formal document from you which they could if they thought necessary hand to O.S.S. in exchange for a similar letter from the Joint Chiefs of Staff in Washington.  I should be most grateful therefore if you could agree to send me a letter more or less in the form of the attached draft which would merely be confirming in a few words the substance of your letter of the 9th August.  Brigadier L.C. Hollis  C.O.S. Secretariat., DRAFT  enclosure to CIi/204S  of let septesiber IMS / Dear lleatbro. With reference to yotir letter of 1/9/42 and furtLec to ay letter of August 9th I confirm that tiie Ciilofs of dtaff i viaas approved of the agroosamfc for world side co-operation between S O.B and O.S.S. of tills in easchange for a einllar ratification of the agraesaant on th part of the United states Joint Chief's of staff., CIPHER TTLEGHifi' DESPATCHED TO NEW YORK. 1.9.42.  FOLLOWING v QR. LOUIS FRANCK From Colonel Taylor. 1. Further to our 2973 v/e have nov received telegron frora Lord Glenconner OTTOW  Telegrm recoivod from Cairo No.0795/0796  Oj. ol.O.id.  .UNQUOTE  2. We fully .appreciate your desire not to riaka protect to Colonel Donovan on basis of London agreement unless absolUtoly necessary but we feel situation regarding Anierican orgaiisation in the Middle East Is now reaching rosily dangerous phase and must be] Cleared up. Therefore think you should approach Colonel Donovan to secure definite applloatien ox-London agreement regarding Middle East or if you eohsidor this Inadvisable for tactical reasons at least to ensure tlxat no action contrary to London agroeuent or conprociising ou --ultimate control In ti.. area . should bo taken.-. -. 3. L'o greatly fear that unless a definite i tiling Is agreed with Colonel Donovan ana issued rj 1 im to his people both In Washington and in '.-airp we will shortly wake up to i5 rid that/ r1can 3.O.E. representatives in i-iddle Last have 'actually established relations with Allied or-other elemr . iddla East vlrlch-it will then be impossible to eliminate and which.will cause unending confusion. 4 Ue also fully appreciate-the-points made in your 0G926 arising frora fact that London agreement has not formally been ratified by either..aide. For action suggested in paras 2 & 3 above wo think you can rely upon moral obligation on Colonel Donovan to act in accordance with1agreement ponding formal ratification. At tho sam tino we have taken up urgently. with Foreign Office need for immediate authority to ratify without any, amendment at all and v/e are reasonably confident ve shall got this authority within next 48 hours. Wo shall also got formal letter from Chiefc of Staff suitable for exchange byyou with Colonel Donovan., FOR NEW YJRK 1 9.42  TO G.' '-. FROM A/D. F.OST XKEDIATE  Furtturr to cur 2975 v/e have now received the Yellowing telegram from k/D.Z. QUOTE tole ran. hoa 0795 0 5 7 from Cairo  400  M A. Further discussions uith D/H show that he has very definite ideas regarding rights of American Mission to follow an independent line of its own particularly for working into  Balkans.  B. fending arrival of American Mission h is developing his ora organisation and reiterates that he is not aware of or bound by terms of agreement concluded in.London. i oreovar he states that he is working on/strucfelons from Washington. C. I therefore told him today fehat though I welcomed assistance he might be able to give I could only continue to work with him on basis of agreement and provided he agrees that its terns shall govern our relationship and his activities. D. He said ho would be unable to offer this as it would be Contrary to his instructions. Hc/is therefore informing his principals of attitude which I have taken and I ask you to insist either that he' conforms -to agreement or Is recalled. My immediately folio inf telegram. 0796.  E. He further argues that American Mission could not be bound by our agreement as we have entered into arrangements with ZP which, NEW YOKE. 1.9.42.  might prove nt Americans from undertaking activities which they consider desirable. In this connection he urges propaganda  value of America In Balkans is very great and that important Balkan minorities in America give State Department an interest which they  cannot subordinate to British political considerations. II also clalma that.A. shares these views.  F. This is clearly a matter for consideration between ZP and State Department but in meantime p/E 400 s activities must be controlled. G. Minister of State has seen this toIpgram 'and concurs. My immediately following telegram. - . ' 0797. ' A. is AVEHlD HAHaiMAN. UNQUOTE  We fully appreciate your desire not to make protest to G.50 000 on basis of London agreement unless absolutely necessary but we feel situation regarding American organisation in the Middle East is now reaching really dangerous phase and must be cleared up. Therefore think yeu should approach 0.50 000 to secure definite M  9  of London agreement regarding Kiddle East or if..you consider this inadvisable for tactical reasons at least to ensure that no action contrary to London agreement or compromising our ultimate control in this area should be talon.  a, hew was 1 9 42  ITiGi 3.  We greatly fear that unless & definite ruling Is agreed with G.50 000 and Issued by him to Ms people both in Washington and In Cairo v/e will shortly wake up to find that American 3.Q E repreoentativer. in Middle East 'nave actually established relations  a  with Allied or ether elcsients in hiddlc East which it Will then be Impossible to el inate. fuid which will' c.mtsQ oineiiding-oonfxi'slon   \ c also fiilly approclate . the points made in your 0692E . h arising from fact that London agreement has not formally lieen ' ratified by either side. hor. action suggested in paras 2 & 3 tib ove wo think you ca. rely upon moral obligation on 0.50 000 to act In accordance with agreement pemilng fcrmal ratlfkution. At the same time we have taken up urgently with 2P need for irxiediato authority to ratify without any amendment at all and we ore reasonably confident we shall get this authority ..within next 48 hours. W shall also gat formal letter from Chiefs of Staff suitable for exchange by you with G.50 000 If necessary. Origin A/ . / .-h .  Class Eisfcributlon, CAIRO ALPHA 1.9.42  FOR A/D.5. from C.D.  Your Alpha 498 and 0007 to A/D.  1. S.O. entirely approves proposals agreed between you and 'Minister of State and set out in latter g-telegram to.8. ARFAR He is telegraphing Minister of State accordingly.  2. Heartiest congratualtionr from all of ushere on most successful conclusion of negotiations so ably carried out by you under particularly difficult circumstances. 3. We are all delighted with agreement -'which gets all our points and we feel certain it will work well and lead to further successful phase for SQO.E. in Middle East. 4. It was a great bit of work keep it up. Class Distribution., COP Y.  CIPHER HLEGRAK RECEIVED PROI- CAIRO DESP 2OSS 31.0.42 RECD.2220 31.0.42  No.0795. '/'  A. Further discussion wibh Captain Robert NOW show that he has very definite idoas regarding rights/of American Hiasion to follow an Independent lino of it a own particularly for working into Balkans. B. Pending arrival of AuerTcan Mission he is developing hicl..own organisation and reiterates that he is not aware of or bound by terms of agreement concluded In London. Moreover he states that he is working on instructions from Washington. C. I therefore told him today that though 1 welcomed assistance he rai iat be able to give I could only continue to'.work with him on basis of agreement and provided ho agrees that its terns shall govern our relationship and 'his activities. D. Hb said he would be -unable to offer this as it would be contrary .to his instractions. lie is therefore informing Ms principals of attitude which I have taken and I must ask you to insist either that he conforms to -agreement or.is recalled L1Y IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING TELL RAI . 0796. ..  E. He further argues that American Mission could not be.bound by our agreement as we have entered into arrangements with Foreign Office which might prevent macrlean-s from' undertaking activities which they consider desirable. In this connection he. urges pro paganda value of America in Balkans is very great and that important Balkan minorities in /aorica givo State Bepartmont an'interest which they cannot subordinate to British Political considerations. He also claims that A. shares those views P. This is clearly a matter for consideration between Foreign Office and State Department But In meantime Captain Low's activities must bo controlled. G. Minister of State has soon this telegram and concurs A. IS AVERI/L HARRISAN., Foreign Office S.W.l. 4th September 1942. I write to confirm my telephone message to you of September 2nd that my Secretary of State agrees that you should ratify your draft agreement with Colonel Donovan without amendment. You know already of two of the points which we here made namely that about Burma and that about the basic principle on which areas should be allocated to yourselves or to the Americans. We should be grateful if you would bear these in mind and put them to the Americans at an appropriate moment. The other two comments which have since been made here are as follows   l The section relating to East Africa describes your mission at Durban as being charged with working into Madagascar and Portuguese East Africa . This description strikes us as somewhat inaccurate since in fact your mission is only authorised to use Portuguese East Africa as a base for work in Madagascar and for watching Axis agents. As East Africa is laid down in the agreement as being a British area and as Colonel Donovan's organisation have no more than the right to attach a liaison mission to your people at Durban there should be no fear of the Americans engaging in any independent activities in Portuguese East Africa. You may however think it wise as and when opportunity offers to dispel any possibility of misunderstanding with the Americans by making it clear to them that the activities of your mission at Durban are in fact circumscribed/ Colonel G.P. Taylor, circumscribed within narrower limits than the v/ording of your agreement with Colonel Donovan would seem to imply.   2 The comment has also been made here that it seems anomalous that the Canaries should fall within Colonel Donovan's sphere of activity when this is still a British military responsibility. On the other hand we regard it as being to our general advantage that the Americans rather than ourselves should be responsible for underground activities in Portuguese and Spanish territory. This is not a view which requires to be communicated tp the Americans but you may like to have it on record and to communicate it to Louis Prank for his own confidential information.  \  l, Ref CD/2864 To DCD/A Copy to PCl A Prom CD a.o0 000 imd G. are expected to arrive on September 8th returning to America on September 11th. Please instruct all concerned to submit to you major items to be placed on the Agenda for ray discussions with the Americans. I wish to receive for Consideration the suggested items by the 11.lb meeting on Monday 7th September so that they can be discussed with G.I . who will attend that meeting., M.0.1 S.P. GFT/83  Wax Office Whitehall  S.W. 1. 8th Septerober 1942.  1 return herewith your draft paper J.P. 42 796 3 .  We are in entire agreement with both the proposed  recommendation to the Chiefs of Staff and the draft  telegram to Washington attached thereto.  Commander F.E. Norfolk War Cabinet Joint Planning Staff Cabinet War Room Storey s Gate  S.W. 1., C M\y  GFT/G7. loth September 1942 TO Comander Idrfolk a. PHOti Colonel G.P. Taylor War Ceblnot .0.1 S. . Joint Plannlnr Jtcffi War Office Storey s Gate' London S .1 S.W.l I return herewith Draft ocper J. . 42 C03 S with Annexes 1 and II. I refer to paragraph 2. of the paper in which it is stated that the O.S.S. organisation under the control of Colonel Donovan covers much the seme ground as our I'.W.X . S.I.S. and G.O.E. I do do not thinl- that it is now quite correct to say that 0.r . covers the same ground as our Psince this work has practically entirely been surrendered by Colonel Donovan end passed on to the Office of War Infoinaction under Hr. niner Davis. Colonel Donovan retains a personal Interest in f. . work thre ugh his chairmanship of tl a Psychological Warfare Cottmittee but 0.' as an organisation does not as far as I can learn intend to carry out any r JY. 1 work itself in the field. Otherwise wo are in entire agreement with the paper and annexea.  -oOo, Copy to  Ml  10.9.42. Dear  Confirming our telephone conversation to-day ytb are ansious to melts use of the laydra link for our traffic to i ew York which at present amounts to about 40 000 groups per month in all in and out.   a wish to use our own cypher and to decode in London. This would involve your handling the above traffic over the wireless link and transmitting to .Palter Stre-t over the teleprinter in code.  I should be glad to have your confirmation at the earliest convenience.  Yours  Col. 1.ffambi r-Parry. Broadway N, h\jj  12th September 1942.  TO Colonel G.B. GUENTHER PR Colonel G.F. TAYLOR 71 % avenor Street M.0 1 S.P. London W.L. War Office S.W.I. With reference to our conversation of this afternoon in connection with the attached correspondence.  I confirm that as far as we are concerned the Woolworth 1 shot Pistol would not b a suitable substitute as regards 5.Q.E. activities for any of the ordnance re ferred to in DO/188/JP of the 20th August 1942 from Lt Colonel J.S. French G. to Lt Colonel J.R. Forgan of the Services of Supply  Colonel G S.  Ref DQ/GPT/90, G k-. fo' Ano'tiicr g6 53 target for A.tip 000 0 t e added to the list to be sent to hift aceor din to our me efn.. . 12.9.42. G..D. .eo tpnhoi- 1942. guuplgj ntal oto for G.50.000. ITALIAU COAiTAL RAlLf AYS a. [mo-imvi 1. The fflaln coastal rail road from GENOA to 3P1ZX& runs throucb. numerous tunnels in the cliffs right up against the ahero. This railroad carries important trafilo ih par laaieriala Including  a supplies from TOHfR and GiKuA to giiXIa the laain Italian raval base ' ' .h war '.isiaterlaia--from' IKAhCE TURIB GSiQA and district to KAPlSS .destined 'fpr-liORTH AF-ilCA. Conbeohently to blooh this Line alone for any uonnld rahle. pei iod 'oodld ha'ire 'great'ntrdtegi valus. ' . 2. The operation could he ffisade still more effective if It sere supplemented hy the simultaneous blocking the two main railroads which cross the Apennines from the Lombard Tlain to'-the Tyrrhenian . coast. The two min.trans-Apesnnlne xnilroads are  '.'p d  a y/diiiA -loni- 0u -eijlh'paM. - b B0L0GKA -I I3T0IA . ' hach of .those railroads .phases through a long ftthhel ' the former at i-o T.o. .0 LX and the latte neh PRACOiHA. .'.3- '. ../ Strateglo yalue of Operation 1. or Operations 1 ar i 2 com   binod wquld.largely depend on correct timing. If 'executed as a proliiaihary-to LOxi\iAY' those operatiQnsAjight Bjakf 'an l.j  coutribution to the success of LOJ IAT B. AyAl ABfcft'njF.  operation-'Ita  a The GE A-STSSIA line was double-tracked shortly before the War and a second tunnel was'In m oot cases b red to takd the second -track thus a double operation would be required to. block both tracks. The stretch between iKAfUSA 6S Em. 'frdA. CkBGA imd  AiXiiOJui 02 isA .however still boliovcd to be o.i.utle tracked which indicates that tna oliffa here are particularly prooipitons. This sector would be tborefora the bottle-neck and the moat suitable for attael . ib]-The principal-gaps -between the tunnels are at  t ' ' \i VmmZZJLt 3 Km frQia fOOTiIRCddO where there la' odn   tinuoua girder bridge aorosa a valley 3 spans  B 11.3&a and 2 83 m il A gap of about 200 m 800 m from V EB A .ia thence anothor t-.u5.'ol a oout. 950 n. ill A second gap about 300 m. 1 followed by tunnel, 'about 000 jo. IpadisSjgrtO  .'iv A gap about X lCK .riotrea long in iMoh the station oi1 COHNIOLIa'la'situatM. t&M this point to. MKABOLA tho lino ap oases to run 0an%imously in a tunnel.  c 5 Of these gaps ii and iii appaar to offer the greatest 'OlManb oftsucooss tUdugh it ia not possible to tell fxom tna 1/100 000 mp whether a mine oh&rgp oausing a fall of rook would be feasible. t' . T.. ..   d lUrtlasr dotailed infopmation and photog ha are in proeess of oolleotion. -.pP ydtlOn -2 v  a fhe two ti ans-Apehaine tunnels isist be asairaed to be guarded and attaoSclng parties would have to be strong enough to dispose of one. or two sentries '.  b Both tuBhaia ara .some distanee...inland .and it would be difficult for the attaeking parties to be lanced on tho ooaat && find their wdy oomplete nith stares ahffl equipiaQxit aoroae oountry to tho tunnels. It will therefore have to be oonr.idered in each oaso as a Paradhuto Operation b imetal le of suitable dropping areas aro being '.prepared iibLiaijagr oaas-iB.tAffioi-B 1. fhe attraction of Operation 1. Apart fTo.a its stiateglo value is that a strong arpad purty eouM be . with substantial auantities o f'.taatprials sifter .lj& target is right up -against the sea and there should not be-any nooepeity to trans port the stores any distanoe after landing a'oreovor thore would bo no -need to. select Italian speaking porsonael or urru Ji- o c.overA or papox d for-tliOM .-. it ootild .bo oofisiasrod ae u sssali.. scale . do Bold Transport and at rials fcould be arranged from Qlbrel.tar.. '  0. jor tho othor too Operations ths situation is entirely different The attacking phitifc-s -uapoct of osoape unless they ocm pass us Italians and ra&ke theii'' way back to the coast ircBi the . Apennines. They would have to be trained tn parachuting Silent killing demolitions and field craft. Th y would have to be provided with suitable identity -papers Snd cover s'to.i. ' u. would also have to be capable mp readers .and able to wteo a -long oroaa aountayy issrch to a distant ronae .. -At A retired firitiShHRHHofricer who knov.s country. intirst-elyaH Kal WHBpB . H. the   ti om dO' yearrft.sidoii.de infoixiotlon. u ... '  ' ' ' ' '0 - .' 4. A 'great d al of iufthor inforiation id' racuirod on mny points and will be provided if the prajfcct is ' .oonsiclsred of iht&rfest, From CH Tos Colonel Donovan.  On your last visit to London in early June this year we both agreed and initialled a record of discus ions between our officers which resulted in on agreement for the co operation of O.'S.S. and S.0. ]. throughout the world on the understanding that this agreement would not come formally  to into force until it had been submitted and approved by United  A  States joint Chiefs of Staff and the State Deportment on the one hand and the British Chiefs of Staff and the Foreign Office on the other.  I am happy to be able to advise you that I have received formal confirmation from both ur Chiefs of Staff and the Foreign Office that they are agreeable to the arrangementreached in June coming into force as a binding agreement on both Ofue with no amendments of any sort.  I understand your authorities have taken up a similar  attitude.  I therefore suggest that by an exchange of lette s such as this one of mine to you and a confirmatory reply from you If you ore in agreement the June agreement should be fomally ratified betxveen us and come into full operation immediately.  The agreement in its original form is not a very con venient one for reference consisting as it does of a record of day-to-day discussions in which the conclusions of one day are sometimes modified by the decisions of the next. I have therefore had my people get out and attach hereto a con solidated version which whilst retaining the exact language of the original eliminates those parts of any discussion  which subsequently modified by further conversations-and if you agree   the A could be accepted by both of us os governing document for  future reference., OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES  UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT 72 Grosvenor Street  LONDON  COPY OF THIS LETTER SENT TO C.D. D/CD A & A/DU for their files  17.9.42. September 15 1942.  Dear Colonel Taylor  I hasten to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of September 15th enclosing a draft record of the discussions which were held in my office with Colonel Donovan on the 12th instant.  While I have no reason to believe that the minutes do not represent accurately the conclusions reached I believe the matter is of such importance that It would be well to have the approval of Colonel Donovan himself. Consequently I am sending forward to Washington by Air Mail Pouch leaving tomorrow a copy of your draft record for his approval or comments. At the same time I have informed him that Sir Charles Hambro has already given his approval to it.  I have also asked Colonel Donovan if he would be so good as to send me a  William Phillips.  Colonel G. Taylor, Attached Is a copy of the SuEsnaxy of the Agreement bettvoen S O.S and tae 0.S.S.3 prepared by the J 5 Joint fiaaners. This dwauiz-y has been approved by the U S. Joint Gixiefs of Staff, am  SEOmT  In June 1942 representative of the Office of Str&teglo UearvieesaMofthe Brit1ah iieeret Operations Executivereaped certain agreements as to the division of their respoasibillties in the conduct of psychological warfare. fliese documents are nos transmitted to the Joint U.3. Chiefa of Staff for approval.  A brief svanjiary of the Agreements is stated below.  fo be effected by British liaison section of the secret Operations Executive with the Office of Strategic Services in s'aehington and a U.8. liaison section of the Office of atrstegil Services with the Secret Operations Executive jSsoewtlve-in hondon. Duties   1 fo represent views on policy matters  2 fo discus disputes referred by field agencies  3 fo exchange information  4 fo coordinate production demand and supply of equipment  5 fo exchange operational and tecteieal intelligence and inforsaatioa on methods of training. o gmHa yyatteJamJBaaA  fo avoid the confusion resulting from two 2 completely independent organisations working in the mm field initial assignment of U.8. and British areas of operations would be made but the U.S. could assign Its own mleeion with headquarters stations and agents to British territory to operate under, direction and control of the British controllers j and vice verso. Differences of opinion would be referred to Washington and London respectively.  of .Terrltoylej.  x  1 To British -India Bast Africa West Africa XX x Gibraltar Balkans and Middle last Western Europe  Poland Czechoslovakia   2 To XI.S. China Australia and S.W. Pacific South Pacific north Africa Finland Atlantic Islands.  3 Joint -Burma -Siam -lad China -Malaya -SuBtatrs. CerRiany Italy Sweden Switzerland. Spain Portugal Russia .  Mptea  x Temporarily British. Will turnover S.O.S. or nisation t 0.8.S. If it r any part becomes a predominantly  0.8. theatre of operations. xx To have a U.S. Mission.  The Joint Psychological Warfare Caasaittee recoiaLiends agreement be entered into ooaceming % ain and Portugal in the near future   d Training Arrangements imde for training fifty four 54 .S. officers in various 8.0.1. schools., 15th September 1 42.  GFT/88  I send you herewith Draft Record of the Discussion held in your office on the 12th September.  Hs you will see thip record is not intended to be exhaustive but aims merely at covering the major points on which decisions were reached.  As regards paragraph 5. Special Targets I have omitted details of the -projects in question for reasons of security since these Minutes nay have to have a certain circulation.  Sir Charles Ilmbro has.already agreed these Minutes and 1 should be grateful if you eaMlet mo Wmm as soon as possible whether you can confirm that the record Is a fair one or advise me of any correction which you would wish to make.  On receipt of your confirmation or amendments I will see that the necessary action calidfor by the Minutes is taken by the sections concerned here.  I attach an additional copy for Colonel Guenther.  William Phillips Esq. 72 Grosvenor Street Ldndon ...1., 15th September 1 42  GFT/88  I send you herewith Draft Record of the Discussion held in your office on the 12th September. As you will see this record is not intended to be exhaustive but alms merely at covering the major points on which decisions were reached.  As regards paragraph 3. Special Targets I have omitted details of the. projects in question for reasons of security since these hinutes may have to have a certain circulation. 1  Sir Charles Hambro has already agreed these Minutes and I should be grateful if you ccuHlet me know as soon as possible whether you can confirm that the record is a fair one or advise rae of any correction which you would wish to make.  On receipt of your confirmation or amendments I will see that the necessary action ca3Ds3i'or by the  hinutes is taken by the sections concerned here.  I attach an additional copy for Colonel Guenther.  William Phillips Esq.  72 Grosvenor Street  L6ndon W.l., It has been agreed that periodical reports as to the progress of S.O.E work on this side should be sent to G M. and at times there may be developments in Intelligence or security work which it will be useful for G.i to know. sill you therefore bear in mind the desirability of keeping r. .i. in the picture if the occasion arises and let U have any copies which you wish sent to U.Ishould like a cony before they are transmitted.  I am sending a copy of this note to  A.D., /w//   U/tJS/22 8 5/9/42 To D.O.D.A. Copy From U  .. iWi.Mi  4ith reference to C.D. s letter vD/2864 rt AD/U'e request 1 enclose two copies of the Arend for the Missions Directorate for dinougsions with 3.50 000., mmm a.  & Cl Qjm vi rm immot OtotrAiR a QB 0Q mopvwml of owj efforts to plmm a reiweawetnlfati'ipo as Vice Oormil at c% vinotot a AppeoAl AtteohmS Has 0 S0 000 plam for r m t tScm 05  paisatlow In tl caim ieo bzonm or Madeira b.  i o ssttX polloy ana rnttors tmimA fef ikmti&m'1 j ssioa. C AppmMx BI uttaohed it tio negotiat a further ao ree anSod % tT p r S lies ioric at to oporatiom oeblo Ho a frma mmkMBMt Vo Al&msm joint operotiosw H, APPENDIX A 5th September 1942 American Penetration of Gape Virde Islands In view of the importance of these Islands we are particularly anxious that they should be adequately covo ad in our joint plans for 3.0. work in est a rica.  ve have been working to infiltrate a member of our Keueols Mission into St. Tinoent Mth consular cover and are still hoping to obtain F.O. consent to this. We recognise at the same time that G.50 000 s  Mercy Ship project offers good opportunities of establishing more or less permanent representation there with exceptional freedom of movement for the supervisors provided its cover is assured. we feel some misgivings on this score and believe that the first trip should be used to test the cover and should not be marked by any active S.O.S. work in the Islands. In the meantime we would welcome ft.50 0 s agreement to our proceeding with our efforts to put a Neucols representative in St Vincent both to cover the interim period and later on to act as a liaison officer with J.50 GOO s organisation in the Islands when it has established itself. In our view an S.G.S. man on the consular staff at St. Vincent could be of great assistance to the -umericjah project. We are also interested in the American project to cover the coast of P.io de Oro with a Gaboverdian fishing vessel and would like to render any assistance in our power to forward this venture. Ve realise however that this must depend upon prior and effective penetration of the Gape Verde Islands by G-.50 000's organisation., A F f K R p. XX liJ.. Copy latter to sir Umrilcs Fotoraon .0.. Potpiza iTl o. 6th o pteJ betZ' 194S IjUit/ thataks for tho copy of tti At rican \ldo Moaoir on Hoskins Idsalon wMoh you sent us together with a draft of tli Ponolan Offioo reply. I outeit herewith our ooiarjsntas I J5 od hardly soy that we entirely arroe with the attitude adopted in the dr-aft reply to the despatch of the Aaerloan ilisaion In the fora proposed. Fvotn out 3.O.K. point of view &jd also in so far as wo are entitled to express an opinion on the snhjost Srcm the .general political point of view wo fool oure tiiat it would cause appalling confusion.  e noti with Intoroat an apparent development in the chametor of the Mission tv&a the stage when It \ma dieousaed by our liaison Bisaion in V aahingtom with Joloi fouovcm. As originally put to us and passed on by us to you Hoskins was to be sent out as Hoad of an o.J.d kioaion to engage in 3.0 S- and 3 1 3. activities P o a the Aide-Monoine hc otrer it see. a clear timt a lauch wider soope for the Uisaion is mwisagod. It would apparently bo an independent Mission in the Middle Bast nfjagod in political and dip emtio work political warfare and propaganda and activities end / 0 n and fuiKstioJis would represent only a portion of its work. In-regard to its .0 .. functions oui-position is perfectly clear. Th London Agrooi ont with Colonel Donoven provides tliat boforo 0.3 3. engagos in any activities in the  dddlo Bast they should send out to Cairo a Head of Missions who would first disottss awl agree with Olsnoomsr the scop of tlie ftotivit.ios to bo undertakei by the Ararioanai aM the towm and extent of the organisation to 1m set up. Only then would he set up any meMsiery of his own. FurtBcraoi ths operations of the i-oaorlean organisation when set up would rei ain uxtler the, 2   Kieral dlveotion ard control of the Head of the BriLtiah J.O.K. Klsaion. c watt to inti at on this procedure being followed and .wo Imvo been urging 'Donovan to take the first step of sending out a Hoad of Moslem who would sons to the necessary agreesent with Olorajoimer as soon as possible. A aoiipfii ison between the. ppocedur provided for in the London Agromwnt and that oxitlined is the Mdo-leKDire misos two ii' nortant points  a though the Aide- oaioire quite correctly atufeos para G. that Hi d o S- Action of the iiOSkins Mission wouM as rogarda actual operations ttxmtlon only with Hi  ' approval and vixler Hi direction of Um appropriate British authorities it cor lotely icpores tlm eqully lEportmit proviso tlmt tlic h .orican organisation should only bo set up after agreer nt has been reached with the British Hoad of Mission regarding its scope and feme  b '-.ven 3'upposing the above point was mtt it Is difficult to see how the London agreeraent wo M work as intended In regerd to tire general control of Aiacrican B o E activities in the Kiadle East fey jfen British. Bead of Mission If the Asieriean Head of Mission i e Hoskins is to b not Merely an o.d.d. mn engaged slsply in j 0 k and a l G activities but rather a sort of Aiaerioan Minister of .fate functioning at Beirut Juch a person would clearly not be corctrollnble in pta ctie by Glonconraor. w ' arc tborofor mst atronuly opposed to thi despatch of Hit Mission In tins fora proposed in the Mdo-ilcsaolre ' At the sa- tij to recognise that there is a gonaine role for the vvi rioena to ploy in the Middle East certainly as far as p . la emtsmpmA and possibly even frou your point of view. T. e would accordingly mloom their aasistsr.ee if ttoy could only to ind' .to d to offer it in the ri it fora, It aefHS to us that wlmt is nainly wmxig with the present preposals ia tSwj greupiJig of all the funetimia Aiioii the Ariorloans K&gpit unofully porfortn in the liidai ' ast Into ono single ana independent Mission whose Mead would virttially be as I have said above an Ai erican Minister of .tat If tho functions could be split up and the various representatives attached in son sort of my to tiie appropriate British Agexusiea all v ouM be ll. For e eusplo if Hoskins or soao other could be sent out to Cairo to arrange with Glenconner for the aettir j up of an /u. rictm 0 K Mission in acoordanee with the term of the London Agreemrst we sliouM be delimited. aiMlaray. anotlier isan doaline with ps o a nda could be seait out to link up with the h.C.l. organisation and os far as tmix area is. Q&memmA if at all with the proposed tv -..8 Mission Iho asxLi tiling could be done with regard to B.L. work which could be linltod up with tlic rocontly appointesd li.bV reprosontotivc at Cairo end with the Co. a.eroi&l DepasHtsaento of His Majesty bEKJassios and Legations. As regards the proposed political activities of Hoskins in the Arab world X would not venture to suggest hoi these sliould be properly coordinated and controlled I would aention fiimlly. bliat we have received a copy of SelogreQ Ho 375 fron the Joint taff Mission in .asbington wiiioh gives a suEt.mry of. a proposal for the desixxtoli of the Hoskins MiaGion vixioh has boon submitted under the title of Flan for uyria by the U 3 Joint fsycivolofjioal Warfare Qoxjultteo to the U.3. Chiefs of Staff for their ooxssents. Shis docm nt is a less full version of tho proposal than that contained in the Aide-Aomire end a loss satisfactory on also in that it oatess no referone whatever to the London Agroonont with Donovan or to the necessity of wosfelng under tlio genoml oontrel of 3 0.B. in the hiddi East. I understand h t -lc boeiriont is b inr considered by rno Ohiefs of -.'-nGff 'today but you ill no doubt already l c aware of this and will have arrarigod to . ke known your views., LIST OF POIBTS TO BE DISCUSSED  WITH G.M.  1. Sacharine. Use of in Latin America and Stores required. 2. Development of W/T network in Latin America. 3. Future policy in Latin America. 4. S.O.E. action in Caribbean against submarines. 5. P.W.E. Are we to continue sending material list attached. Are we to continue letter-writing campaign. 6. Report re F. Ellis. 7. Discuss Britanova situation. 8. R. Tiward suggested for Brazil. 9. Col. ARCE1s report -discuss. 10. Discuss Ministry of Supply and Lease-Lend payments. 11. Discuss United Nations Labour Committee . Cable 117 Class E 12. S.A. Courier Scheme. 13. Cost of Hydra Station. 14 G.101 to go to India. 15. Employment of Lord D. Cecil and Clissold. 16. Future of Hirschburg and Horowitz. 17. Employment of Nash in Argentine. 18. Future of G 140. Jo. ftvtuus  'S -l/od '/, cop DCD0/569/MG. 5/9/42.  1 PLP aja ip TO AD/U. PHOMS D/GD 0 The following items are suggested for the Agenda for discussions with G 50 000 if C/D approves. 1. j.O.E. s relations with 0 -.o. regarding Poland aVd CzecKoaloVakila Details are at A attached 2. Suggested targets for an American Operation Details of three targets are at B attached. 5 Arrangements for use of IT. .A. bag from Lisbon to Berne. Details at G attached. 4. .1 nais khiestIons. Details at D attached 6 Training questions.  a Is the continuance of o.T.o.103 justified and if so for how long  b The dangers of security involved in the continued changes in G 50 000 a organisa tion. A number of officers who have been trained by us and shown all our methods have now left G.S.S. or at any rate the .3.0. branch of the department. It is suggested that it be pointed out to G. and G.50 000 that all these officers have received very secret information and that they should sign a declaration before leaving 0.3.a. stating that they will not disclose anything that they have learnt while In the organisation in view of the dangers to security which would be in volved.  c The future employment of any officer sent to us for training should be very carefully considered by G 50 000 before he is despatched as lack of foresight leads to insecurity and also wasted effort on the part of our training es tablishments., ftp. [ M . 15 3   j sm.   A 14/8/48. noye ok i kdikg Recent negotiations In America for the provision of dollars for the fBig Scheme have shown that it is time w con sidered in greater detail what form 3.0 B co-operation with 0.3.3. should take in the support of the underground action in Poland and Czechoslovakia. 2. It is clear that we must adopt no dog in the manger attitude since there is ranch that the Americans have to offer both in the political and the material sphere. On the other hand any ill-considered intervention by the Americans at this juncture especially if it were not co-ordinated with our own efforts might easily prejudice the smooth working of the organisation which is at present in existence for amintaining liaison with these Secret Amies. There is another point j both Poles and Czechs are well aware that by making their own terras with the Americans they should be able to play 3.0.E. off against 0 3.3. thereby securing a double measure of everything. This is a pastime in which all Slav nations excel and in our view this unnecessary complication can only be avoided provided S.0.1 and. 0.8.3 consider all requests jointly and present an United Front. 3. The help which we want from the Americans is primarily material notably the provision of dollars and long range aircraft. Indeed a preliminary study of the plan put forward by the Poles to the Chiefs of Staff Committee for the re-occupation of Poland makes it clear that the material for cm operation on the scale envisaged must come mainly from American sources.  ' ' '' 4. In addition we cannot ignore the psychological factor. At a time when the countries in occupied Europe have almost given up hope of liberation. It would in our view be of immense tonic value for then to know that the Americans are interesting them selves directly in the underground war which they continue to carry on against the Germans and we would even go so far as to recomend that at least on of the Despatching Officers should be an American so that our abiturendi should see an American uniform just before their departure. 5. We therefore propose that the Americans should be invited to participate as much as they like in the training of our present students and particularly 3n the preparation of plans for the ultimate re-occupation of Poland and Czechoslovakia For our part we wish for the present to keep the actual liaison operations under our ovai control since we do not feel that at the moment the Americans are qualified to take this on but we are quite prepared to initiate them in due course. 6. As soon as the Americans can nominate who in their organisation will be responsible for Polish and Czech affairs. It is important that an emissary from our side should visit the TJ.E.A. and carry out the necessary negotiations 7. In conolxiaion I would add that we consider this matter  to be urgent and that unless we take up a positive attitude to this question in the very near future the Poles and Czechs will male separate approaches to the Americana on their own terms., ot r   LU.I I 'B DCDO/1304. 5th .September 1942 TO C.D. FROM D/CD 0 . Copy to AD/U. 1 Attached in order of preference is a selection of targets which I consider should be suitable for the type of operation Involving an attacking party of from 10 to 30 men as suggested by G 50 000. Attached telegram from New York refers . 94418 dated 18 8 42. . 2 If you agree would you please forward the list for him to see when lie is over liere. Much fxiller information can be made available when required but 1 thought that the information given at present would enable him to decide tsfoether or not the targets proposed were of sufficient importance and suitable objectives for attack., 5th woptember 1942 y 0 id A Sioaa LX3T OF 3KL.1 TAHGSTS.  Hydro-electric power station. TvamSoxmv station and hook Gates Shis is one of the largest iixstallations of its kind in Europe and is known to everybody in France Gemaany and Switzerland. It is just in Alsace which has now been officially incorporated in the Reich and its destruction would seriously affect Gertsen industry and in particular German transportation. She target is fairly isolated and is only about 10 kilometres from the Swiss frontier. There Is ample wooded cover mar it and the population is likely to be friendly. A large part of the electrical output of the station is fed Into Germany and the locks control the whole of the traffic up the Rhine into -iv'itzex land and their destruction would prevent this traffic particularly in the dry season. The attackers should have a reasonable chance of escape across the frontier. M3P.m M g   a Tim group consists of KRAESN I Mine KHABEN II Min  with one concentration plant FJoTIAHD Power Station and SKJERKA Power Station lying in an area approKiraately 50 Kiiles N.W. of KSISTIAHSAM S. The area is reached by a single road which runs from PIEKKEFJOKD about 40 miles distant. The mines are situated is an isolated mountainous region above the tree line  b The mines represent Germany e chief source of molybdenum. The Germans -Krupps are doing their utmost to increase the output to the fullest extent and it is estimated that the planned output of 1 500 tons may be readied in October 1942 This entails the mining and refining of some 1 000 000 tons of crude ore M.E.W consider that KNABEN is the most outstanding objective in Norway from the economic point of view. The Norwegian Government agrees with this estimate  e There is no practical prospect of the party being able to withdraw to the sea. The chances of escape into Sweden would be small. In accordance with the existing policy of attacking all fora of transportation w have considered the possibility of a raid on a large marshalling yard. Eueh a raid would be nothing like so -spectacular but skilful propaganda should succeed in emphasising its great importance. The target suggested is tli yard at GT PIERRE BB8GGRFS to the J.E. of TOURS which lies within 25 kilometres of the debarkation line and therefore offers a reasonable prospect of escape to the attackers. This yard is of the double fig 8 type with a hump and control tower in the centre. There is also a large locomotive running shed which should fora the principal target. The line is electrified and it is known that recent air raid damage took eight days to repair owing to a shortage of Insulators and electrical parts.. Furthermore the shortage of steam locomotives caused a complete stoppage of traffic until the electrical system could be repaired., r-r- T3  me- i ' .UJ u  o' iHJ sen II J/IT/3472. 5th September 1942 TO D/CD Q . PROM J. .... Your DCDO/1303 of the 4th September The most important matter for discussion affecting work in all the countries adjoining Switzerland is a woxteing arrangement for the use of the XJ S A bag from Lisbon to Berne which A Will ensire our being able to send forward .materials and devices in adequate quantities for our operations B Will be conducted under a general agreement which covers us under the F.O. stipulation .that the Americans are to be advised of the nature of the articles. G. Will dispense with the present necessity for the despatch from Lisbon being a matter in which both our representative and theirs Is open to the charge of going outside or beyond the authority of their respective II.Q. W could offer A. To assure G 50 000 that any articles sent would only be of a nature and so packed as to have been accorded the approval of the F.O for transit by bag to Lisbon B That explosives and initiators would on no occasion be contained in the scaa bag. 0. That we should be willing. If so required to inform 6 50 000 Ms London representative or Ms Lisbon representative of the nature and quantity of what we despatch. At present the position with regard to despatch from Lisbon is exposed to the risk of terminating at any tine as it is dependent very largely on the willingness of our re presentative and 6 50 000 3 representative to go beyond their authority.,  D  MS/AMP/584 5th September 1942 TO i D/CD 0 . FROM MS. . .w . . ... .... VISIT OF G 50.OOP AM G. Referenee your DODO/1303 dated 4th September 1942 I think the following points night be discussed 1 her Station for Western Europe iigreeaient should be reached that only on War Station should exist for Western Europe this to be -under our control Actually this station will be in two parts and if by any chance the command of the operating forces were divided into two independent parts which appears most -unlikely it would be possible for fees two stations to operate Independently. 2 In view of 1 above I am strongly of the opinion that only on training school should exist -which would ensir e a similar type of training and the Americans having the bene fit of our experience. The school can be if necessary split into two parts but must be under unified control 8 lva.r Station Abroad As the Overseas areas will I understand be either under one or otter control the War Stations will fall into the same divisions 4 It is considered that on main line station alone should operate in this country to co-nunic&te with all the war stations 'mentioned in 3 above except that the communi cations with lew York will be carried by the existing link operated through Cf 5 American 11 0Q in England should appoint a C.G.O. forthwith so that no delay my be experienced In carrying out decisions arrived at 6 The extent to which G 60 000 can assist us in equipping min line and war stations should be ascertained both as regards equipment and personnel., u/xx/2305. 8.9.42. To AD/P. From U. At A.D. s request I enclose copy of the summarised Progress Report for the month ending 2nd September 1942 so far as the Missions are concerned. Will you please signify your approval of this prior to transmission to America., 3.O.E. PROGRjSBS REPOR1 Month-ending 2nd September 194E BALM8 & Ryj3lAll 3E0TI0I  YUGOSLAVIA  Good wireless contact has been maintained during the month. Numerous messages have been received and passed which show that A/H.31 has further strengthened his hold over MONTENEGRO SANJAK and SOUTH SERBIA and he has arranged successfully five reception areas. He has informed us that he is ready to receive material and train bodies with the specific object of attacking the BELGRADE-NISH Railway.  Plans are being made to drop numerous food parcels and leaflets over BELGRADE on the night of the King s birthday and during the month considerable numbers of leaflets have been dropped in various parts of Yugoslavia.  BULGARIA  It appears that certain Bulgarian guerillas are co operating with A/H.31 and that these guerillas are believed to be active in the area south of Sofia.  Bulgarian leaflets were dropped over SOFIA PLEYDIN and SQKALYAN during the month.  ABBMIA  We axe attempting to obtain contact by courier with MUHARREM BEJRAKTAR who we are Informed by A/H.31 is believed to be operating south of TETEVO.  GREECE  Wireless communication still continues extremely difficult and the only station operating has been working on reduced power and is very cautious., -2   fe have learned that one of our agents has been invited by the Russians to go to ISTANBUL and contact the Soviet authorities there  Colonel ZERVAO has approached us asking for a f/T Set for direct communications and although he is known to be untrust worthy in money matters he is reported to have a large and Influential following.  It has been agreed that Oomraander ZASGAS should establish an independent Greek service for escapees intelligence and sabotage  osm.  The situation in Crete has become obscure and our only remaining contact during the past fortnight is via O8 channels.  HgOMMIA .  a/H 25 arrived in ISTANBUL and gave a full report on the political situation. This shows that tension is developing between the Roumanian and German Governments due to increased economic demands and to the unsympathetic view of Roumania taken by the German Government in the Hungarian/Roumanian disputes.  A/H.25 returned to Istanbul at the end of the month.  The Turkish YP in BUCHAREST who is a friend of MYRON brought a message to Istanbul from MYRON that he would endeavour to leave by plane for ALEPPO in the middle of August but no news has been received of his arrival. Presumably the arrangements miscarried.  BERNE reports that the Chilean YB in BUCHAREST who is in Geneva stated that two Roumanians had arrived in Switzerland to contact the British with the consent of ANT0NE3CU. At the same time LISBON reports that a Roumanian Secret Service agent had arrived bringing instructions to Roumanian YP to pass a mes sage to the British that ANT0NE80U considers MYRON most valuable to Roumania and therefore guarantees his liberty even if the, 3  Germans should ask for reprisals against him. It is thought that both events may be an attempt to find out how interested we are in MfHOH.  mm.  Our cover in Istanbul has been changed from A.I.A. Shipping 1 to Shipping Department of British Embassy'1. Further W/T Sets have been sent to Turkey.  mm  There are reasonable suspicions that the Military Governors of ISFAHAI and of FiSHEIDAH who are both pro-German may have instigated the ambush which resulted in the death of our agent D/M.14 at the hands of brigand tribesmen near DGRUD.  A post-occupational courier service is being organised along the PERSIAM GULF.  IRAft  A detailed plan fox raising guerillas in northern Iraq using six British Kurdish-speaking officers lias been worked out. This has been approved by the 0.0 10th Army and the British Minister.  Courier services to PERSIA SYRIA and other points are being laid on and plans have been made for the Installation before the end of the year of a W/T war station and a main line  station at BASRA.  miA \Ij  In addition to the post-occupational sabotage organisation mentioned previously a Greek Levant network of cells through the LEVANT is being laid on. It will have Its own f/T and courier   t services.  CYPRUS  Plans as approved by the Governor and Military commander for Cyprus have reached us. They provide for the development of, a caique base to be used as a halfway house for siauggling into GHEKOS and a post-occupational network of celle for sabotage and propaganda. It is possible in the event of enexay occupation  that some Commandos will be left behind and these will be under  the command of our Field Commander.  In addition to the post-occupational organisation mentioned previouslyi CAIRO are considering the possibility of forming an Arab post-occupational organisation.  A pos toccupational courier service operating from EGYPT has been laid on already.  EGYPT In addition to the post-occupational organ cation mentioned already the Greek-Levant network will have cells in Egypt. The existing subversive propaganda organisation is being adapted to continue after occupation and hand presses are being Installed  -QJSM41CA  Our agent behind the enemy lines was withdrawn in the middle of August.  AMOhO-ECrYPTlAh StJDAlf CAIRO is being pressed to go ahead with the establishment  of an organisation at KHARTOUM with W/T and stores as an emergency  base for communications and possible operations in the event of  EGYPT or even ABYSSI.IIA being occupied by the enemy.  A plan is being made also for the installation before the  end of the year of a W/T war station and a main line station at  KHARTOUM. In the event of enemy occupation these stations will  be withdrawn to NAIROBI.  JIBUTI Plans to Infiltrate f/T sets axe going ahead in tion with C who is being very co-operative., -5-  Our chief representative left London on the 20th August anti is expected in MOSCOW at the beginning of September. D/P.l has left London via the sea route to join the Mission in Moscow. He hopes to arrive there about the third week in September. O., OBIHA  A report 1ms been received frcsa an agmut who visited r 7Ajra m0WAll French leased territory and MACAO Portuguese colony in South China where he contacted some possible and likely agents and obtained considerable information on local  conditions and on conditions at HOUGKOIIG. At 1IA0A0 he gave the British Consul a new code and introduced another in case the first  -  should be oozapromised. A constant flow of intelligence has thus been assured and the Consulate at MACAO lias been put into direct touch with the Embassy at CHtUIGICIMG.  The Chinese at CHGIIGMI-TC maintain their ready acceptance of gifts but continue their passive resistance to any active steps suggested by either British ox Americans. The latter are not making appreciable headway and have had some rebuffs. We have succeeded in consolidating our influence in the Chinese Resources Information Bureau whose workm are now subsidising. That the work is proceeding along definite S.O.E. lines and that the Chinese are not inactive in their own interests is proved by the Charter of the Bureau s Field Organisation which is charged with the establishment of a network of activity in HOFiTH CIUIIA NORTH M01TG0LIA MANCHURIA KOREA FORMOSA and JAPAN MOPM. Apart from establishing wireless intelligence and counter-espionage systems the Charter provides for the provision of lines1 into and out of Japanese-controlled territory the establishment of close connections with puppet 1 civil and military officials \ mercenary Japanese individuals and all Japanese revolutionary and anti-war organisations the location of enemy military and indus trial plants and drains for raiding purposes the collection of codes secret documents maps banknotes equipment books   \ circulars etc. etc.  Our two principal agents connected with the Bureau are t making successive visits to INDIA to establish liaison at MW DELHI, anti to ke j our Indian H.Q. informed of the extent of Chinese undergrouiid activities. 'Thilst these can be safely stimulated in the Chinese sphere it is essential that tre should retain our own initiative and control in underground activities in KCdlOKOHQ and MALAYA. X11DIA Colonel BEYT8 left for India on the 19th August by air. It has been decided that it is not possible to select Italians from prisoners-of-war carps in India for S.O.K work. Difficulties of selection segregation and release haw proved too great. Major C.J.P. HUD JOH lias transferred to W Beetion to go to the field and Captain C.A.L. CRJISE O.B.E. has taken his place and has been allotted Major Hudson's symbol. AUSTRO. I.S.D. report that the Timer party has had considerable trouble and has lost its stores but communication with them has been established they are in touch with local Dutch and Australian forces already in Timor. WEST and ZA& MBIM 'ZEST ASRICA yiQHf goumm - Definite proposals involving the establishment of an advanced P.W.E. Headquarters in P/est Africa leaving 0.0. E. in control of actual dissemination are under consideration by P.W.E Approval has been obtained for the establishment of two additional 3.O.E. training schools one in ACCRA Gold Coast and the other in SIERRA LEONE. NEUTRAL OOLOJIIEg Two interviews between the head of the Mission and the Resident Minister have been satisfactory and the Minister is sympathetic to S.O. action., -8-.  AirOOLA  Tfes OonsulGeneral has approved of the formation of an Anglo-Portuguege Olub in LGAHDAf which will spdnsor propaganda hy means of a oinema van  One of our representatives has gone to FERHAIIDO PO as Labour Adviser.    Oonveraatioas are now being held between our head repre sentative from DIEGO SUAREZ and the military authorities at M0MBA33A.  PQRrUGAh  Our new chief representative has arrived in LISBON. His name is Captain HOHBERGER and he is attached to the Embassy as Hon. Attache.  vmygmL&msiLmm  We have heard that.misfortune has overtaken one of the  organisations in CASABLANCA 140 out of a membership of 480  have been arrested and the whole group are being watched.   H has arrived in GIBRALTAR to assist AP/W., MOST SECRET  U/XX/2284. 4.9 42.  To A..U From U.  Herewith a copy of the abridged Progress Report so far as the Missions are concerned. Would you let me know if it has your approval and whether you require a copy to go to AD/P for his approval for transmission to  U.S.A. With reference to D/CD 0 s instructions that you passed to me have you yet received the report from B/CD 0 SectionXas promised in para.3 of his minute I note the further arrangement that you have made and will contact the heads of his Section weekly., 3.O.E. PROGRESS REPORT Month-ending 2nd September 19AR BALKM8 & RU8SIM SECTION  YUGOSLAVIA  Good wireless contact has been maintained during the month. Numerous messages have been received and passed which show that A/H.31 has further strengthened his hold over MONTEMEGRO SANJAK and SOUYH SERBIA and he has arranged successfully five reception areas. He has informed us that he is ready to receive material and train bodies with the specific object of attacking the BELGRADE-HISH Railway.  Plans are being made to drop numerous food parcels and leaflets over BELGRADE on the night of the King's birthday and during the month considerable numbers of leaflets have been dropped in various parts of Yugoslavia.  BULGARIA  It appears that certain Bulgarian guerillas are co operating with A/H.31 and that these guerillas are believed to be active in the area south of Sofia.  Bulgarian leaflets were dropped over SOFIA PLEVDII and SGMALYAH during the month.  ALBMIA  We are attempting to obtain contact by courier with MUHARREM BEJRAKTAR who we are informed by A/H.31 is believed to be operating south of TETEVO.  Qflg-Sg  Wireless communication still continues extremely difficult and the only station operating has been working on reduced power and is very cautious., -2-   We have learned that one of our agents has been invited by the Russians to go to ISTANBUL and contact the Soviet authorities there.  Oolonel ZERVAO has approached us asking for a W/T Set for direct communications and although he is known to be untrust worthy in money matters he is reported to have a large and influential following.  It has been agreed that Commander ZANGAS should establish an independent Greek service for escapees intelligence and sabotage.  CRETE The situation in Crete has become obscure and our only remaining contact during the past fortnight is via MCB channels.  ROUMANIA  A/H.25 arrived in ISTANBUL and gave a full report on the political situation. This shows that tension is developing between the Roumanian and German Governments due to increased economic demands and to the unsympathetic view of Roumania taken by the German Government in the Hungarian/Roumanian disputes.  A/H.25 returned to Istanbul at the end of the month.  The Turkish YP in BUCHAREST who is a friend of MYRON brought a igessage to Istanbul from MYRON that he would endeavour to leave by plane for ALEPPO in the middle of August but no news has been received of his arrival. Presumably the arrangements miscarried.  BERNE reports that the Chilean YB in BUCHAREST who is in Geneva stated that two Roumanians had arrived in Switzerland to contact the British with the consent of ANTONESCU. At the same time LISBON reports that a Roumanian Secret Service agent had arrived bringing instructions to Roumanian YP to pass a mes sage to the British that ANTONESCU considers MIRON most valuable to Roumania and therefore guarantees his liberty even if the, Germans should ask for reprisals against him. It Is thought that hoth events may he an attempt to find out how interested we are in MYRON.  TURKEY Our cover in Istanbul has been changed from A.N.A. Shipping to Shipping Department of British Embassy . Further w/T Sets have been sent to Turkey.  PERSIA  There are reasonable suspicions that the Military Governors of ISFAHAN and of F1REIDAN who are both pro-German may have instigated the ambush which resulted in the death of our agent D/M.14 at the hands of brigand tribesmen near DORUD.  A post-occupational courier service is being organised along the PERSIAN GULF.  IRAQ  A detailed plan for raising guerillas in Northern Iraq using six British Kurdish-speaking officers has been worked out. This has been approved by the 0.0. 10th Army and the British Minister.  Courier services to PERSIA SYRIA and other points are being laid on and plans have been made for the installation before the end of the year of a W/T war station and a main line station at BASRA.  SYRIA  In addition to the post-occupational sabotage organisation mentioned previously a Greek Levant network of cells through the LEVANT is being laid on. It will have its own f/T and courier services.  CYPRUS Plans as approved by the Governor and Military Commander for Cyprus have reached us. They provide for the development of, a caique base to be used aa a halfway house for smuggling into GREECE and a post-occupational network of cells for sabotage and propaganda. It is possible in the event of enemy occupation that some Commandos will be left behind and these will be under  the command of our Field Commander.  mmm.  In addition to the post-occupational organisation mentioned previously CAIRO are considering the possibility of forming an Arab post-occupational organisation.  A post-occupational courier service operating from EGYPT has been laid on already.  EGYPT  In addition to the post-occupational organisation mentioned  already the Greek-Levant network will have cells in Egypt.  The existing subversive propaganda organisation is being  adapted to continue after ocoupation and hand presses are being  installed.  [aSsU  Our agent behind the enemy lines was withdrawn in the middle of August.  AHGLO-EGYPTIAI 3'0DAM  CAIRO is being pressed to go ahead with the establishment  of an organisation at KHARTOUM with f/T and stores as an emergency  base for communications and possible operations in the event of  EGYPT or even ABYS3IMA being occupied by the enemy.  A plan is being made also for the installation before the  end of the year of a w/T war station and a main line station at  KHARTOUM. In the event of enemy occupation these stations will  be withdrawn to NAIROBI.  JIBUTI  Plans to infiltrate w/T sets are going ahead in conjunc  tion with C who is being very co-operative., -5-  RU83XA Out chief representative left London on the 20th August and is expected in MOSCOW at the beginning of September.  D/p.1 has left London via the sea route to join the Mission ih Moscow. He hopes to arrive there about the third week in September.  O, 6  OHIM  A report has been received from an agent who visited KjTANGEOHOWAN French leased territory and MACAO Portuguese colony in South China where he contacted some possible and likely agents and obtained considerable information on local conditions and on conditions at HONGKONG. At MACAO he gave the British Consul a new code and introduced another in case the first should be compromised. A constant flow of intelligence has thus been assured and the Consulate at MACAO has been put into direct touch with the Embassy at CHUNGKING.  The Chinese at CHUNGKING maintain their ready acceptance    of gifts but continue their passive resistance to any active steps suggested by either British or Americans. The latter are not making appreciable headway and have had some rebuffs. We have succeeded in consolidating our influence in the Chinese Resources Information Bureau whose work we are now subsidising. That the work is proceeding along definite S.O.E. lines and that the Chinese are not inactive in their own interests is proved by the Charter of the Bureau's Field Organisation which is charged with the establishment of a network of activity in NORTH CHINA NORTH MONGOLIA MANCHURIA KOREA FORMOSA and JAPAN PROPER. Apart from establishing wireless intelligence and counter-espionage systems the Charter provides for the provision of lines into and out of Japanese-controlled territory the establishment of close connections with puppet civil and military officials mercenary Japanese individuals and all Japanese revolutionary and anti-war organisations the location of enemy military and indus trial plants and dumps for raiding purposes the collection of codes secret documents maps banknotes equipment books circulars etc. etc.  Our two principal agents connected with the Bureau are  making successive visits to INDIA to establish liaison at NEW DELHI, -7   and to Iteep our Indian H Q. informed of the extent of Chinese underground activities. Whilst these can be safely stimulated in the Chinese sphere it is essential that we should retain our  own initiative and control in underground activities in HONGKOHG  and.MALAYA.  lisTDIA  Colonel EEYTS left for India on the 19th August by air.  It has been decided that it is not possible to select Italians from prisoners-of-war can js in India for S.O.E. work. Difficulties of selection segregation and release have proved  too great.  Major C.J.P. HODSON has transferred to W Section to go to the field and Captain C.A.L. GUISE O.B.E. has taken his place and has been allotted Major Hudson s symbol.  AUSTRALIA  I.S.D. report that the Timer party has had considerable trouble and has lost its stores but communication with them has been established they are in touch with local Dutch and Australian forces already in Timor. WEST and EAST AFRICA  WEST AFRICA VICHY COLONIES Definite proposals involving the establishment of an advanced  P.W.E. Headquarters in West Africa leaving S.O.E. in control of actual dissemination are under consideration by P.W.E Approval has been obtained for the establishment of two additional S.O.E. training schools one in ACCRA Gold Coast and the other in SIERRA LEONE.  NEUTRAL COLONIES Two interviews between the head of the Mission and the. Resident Minister have been satisfactory and the Minister is sympathetic to S.O. action., / -8-  MGOLA The Oonsul-General has approved of the formation of an AngloPortuguese Club in LOANDA which will sponsor propaganda  by means of a cinema van  SPANISH GUIITEA  One of our representatives has gone to FERNAI'DO PO as  Labour Adviser  EAST AFRICA Conversations are now being held between our head repre  sentative from DIEGO SUAREZ and the military authorities at MOMBASSA. H SECTION PORTUGAL  Our new chief representative lias arrived in LISBON. His name is Captain HOMBERGER and he is attached to the Embassy as Hon. Attache .  GIBRALTAR & NORTH AERICA  We have heard that misfortune hag overtaken one of the organisations in CASABLANCA. 140 out of a membership of 4-80 have been arrested and the whole group are being watched  'H has arrived in GIBRALTAR to assist AD/W., Copy for  10th Sejjbembex  rmiwifai Ct HUOTTOPl  Sept. 10th Arrival.  ll/13th Consultation in London with Col. Guenther and British Officers.  14th a.m. Leave Claridge s 9.45 for Station XVa.  p.m. Discussion with British Officers.  15th 9.3O a.m. Departure from Claridge s for Stations 52 and 53  16th 9.30 a.ra. Departure from Claridge's for Stations 17 9 and 12.  17/l8th 9.45 a m Departure from Glaridge s for Station III and on to B.A. Return approximately 7 P . o 18th September.  19th Available for discussions in London.  20th Lunch with G/Capt. Grierson and thence to Operations Room. Later to Station 6l.  21st Available for discussion in London.  22nd -Demonstration arranged by Brig. Gubbins.  23rd -Available for discussions In London  till departure, DRAFT Ifi Ok/ulDUU FRO G.Ii. TO G /.M G . . As a result of the discussion on Wednesday evening the 16-th instant I have reached the following conclusions as to the way in which the scheme for developing S.O.E. activities in South America in conjxmction v/ith a security plan for that area should now he handled.  1  The original plan put up to Duff Cooper for activities in South America envisaged not merely a limited security scheme for   the protection of certain vital British raw materials and transport facilities hut the extention of training and preparation to virtually all British interests in South America and the development of a British Conimunities scheme in this area. Furthermore the leading role in this programme was definitely Intended to he allotted to S.O.B. who in addition to heing responsible for training in their Canadian school would supply the very considerable staffneeded in South America and would in conjunction with the security Co-ordination pl ectorate in London undertake the work of contacting British interests and  generally dealing with the administration at tixis end. Finally . it was proposed that G.M. should actually direct sad maiiage the whole programme at the American end under the largely nominal authority of sir Canop Guthrie.  e In view of the reaction of Mr Duff Cooper to this scheme  when put to him it was agreed by all that it must be at least temporarily dropped and that S.O.E. must retire into the back ground in regard to the Security Scheme for South America and must not give any appearance of wishing to get control of It or to develop and exploit it for its own purposes.  We thus return to the original position position in which G in hia capacity as Director of Security Co-ordination in Mew York has been asked by the Security Co-ordination Authorities in London and by the Chiefs of Staff to undertake at once a, Security Scheme in South America for the protection of certain vital British interests there and to call for this purpose for such assistance from S.O.K. and S.I.8. as he may think necessary and desirable. As far as 3.0.I. is concerned I am naturally entirely agreeable that the S.O.B. Organisation both in the Americas and in London should provide any assistance required and G. will advise Duff Cooper of this when he seas him this morning the 17th instant.  As regards the American end the position will be that G. In his capacity as Director of Security Co-ordination will have e Charter to go ahead with the South American security Scheme.  .... . likewise have a Charter to 50 ahead with the development of their Organisation in South America subject only to certain limitations imposed by the Foreign Office in regard to the carrying out of actual operations and '. under 0. s general control is responsible for carrying out these functions. I fully agree that in his Joint capacity G. should integrate the   Security and 3.0. and if he wishes the d.I.U. Plans for South America and I also agree that as from its nature S.Q.K. Is much the most suitable Organisation for developing an Integratedscheme on these lines he should in the main use  S.o.B. staff and 3.O.B. facilities for.this purpose. It is recognised that ae the immediate occasion for the development of the South American scheme ie the security requirerwnts indicated to G. by Mr. Duff Cooper and the Chiefs of atafi Sir Canop Guthrie as the head of the Security side of G. s   Organisation should at least nominally take the lead in the execution of the Plan. I am quite agreeable however that in practice G.M. and his staff should do the real work either directly add when necessary with the knowledge and approval of Sir C. Guthrie or acting nominally on Sir C. Guthrie s behalf.  milst me cannot say at the moment how far it will be possible by this method to achieve the full programs originally put to Duff Cooper and outlined in Para. 1 above it seaas to, me likely that a very great deal can be done without raising would be any of the difficulties which x /breught to the for by persistence with' the scheme in its previous form. Should the 'Foreign Office decide to eetqp a Department to deal with the development of Xl Britie i aQtn mmity org Tiotrtion in rhmth  merica it would b neceseaiy for 3.0. . to tie in their work in this matter with the Foreign Office Department in the same way m it is now proposed to integrate the Beeurity and 0 0.K. Schemes. In the meantime 3.O.K.' con proceed with its prep arations for Jiritish Gcmmunlty Organisation as part of the joint security/a.o. . scheme. As regards the London end it would soem unwise unduly to pres a.0.services upon Duff Cooper and hlploek. Our asoistance will bo offered to them by O. at this morning s meeting and the possibility of using our machinery can. bo tactfully drawn to their attention froi time to time in future  as the opportunity preafrits itself by Al /0. As the Security Co-ordination Directorate in London is not itself organised to carry out the sort of work which will be ssauired at tlie London end for the execution of the South American sch ae and . as 1 understand Duff Cooper is not anxious to expand his Organisation it wo Id seem almost inevitable that they should eventually tum to us for help.  The above prograntno raises inevitably questions of Personnel  and Finance oh which 1 think i should ley down the procedure which I wish to see followed '  a  When it was envisaged that 8.0.15. would openly and with the full agreement of other parties concerned-take over responsibility for the Punning of the whole South American scheme it would have been entirely in order for G.M. in the course of his visit here to have made arrangements for the taking on of the staff required.  Under the revised scheme however as set out above it, k  G.M. It seems to me that it will be necessary for G./and Sir  C. Guthrie to work out carefully which ports of the integrated scheme would he curried out by 3.0. . Personnel and which parts hy security personnel and thus to determine how far the very aonsiderohle new staff rectuired should he taken on as .0.E. staff or security staff. /hen this has ail been worked out 0. should send hack hie proposals in detail so that I may authorise the S.o.a. staff increase as required and so that v/e here may collect such staff as should he sup lied from London. The interviews which G.M. apd AD/U have already held during the last -week will of course he useful for this purpose. b TIMHCS  The same principle ahould.be applied with regard to Q finance. G. with his' two managers ana-nir G. Guthrie shbuld work out what financial requirements should he home by 3.O.S. and what hy Security. Although the fundamental idea is that the scheme should he a single integrated on and that therefore its budget should he worked out as a whole it may for obvious reasons hav to have the appearance of being two schemes one tj.O. . and the other Security each with its own budget Mp own view-is that it will he an advantage for the   .u. side of the budget to be os large a proportion of the whole as possible for the reason that control of the puree ten to give control of operations The main item in the runAing cost of the Scheme will. tKidouhtedly h the cost of training which is estimated at approximately 1 200 dollars per head This should clearly appear on the 3.O.B. side of the budget  G. will accordingly produce a budget In the foiga that seems best to him and send it to London so that I may approve the G.O.G. contribution . f v . .  London. september 1942., TO C.D FROM VD Copy to A/DUj G M. Oaesur.  Tii Summary of Agreement between the British S.O.K. and Ataerican l-.O. 3.B . stated that there was no need to come to detailed agreement regarding collaboration of British and American orgfe isations in Spain and Portugal during the discusslonc of June 1942.  The American Joint Chiefs of Staff however in confirming to G.50 OOO their agreement of the arrangements made during the course of the June discussions urged that the agreement should be completed by early negotiations of en arrangement covering Spain and Portugal.  The following is therefore put forward as a basis of discussions with G.50 0GG.  C 5u OOo should appoint an officer with Service or Commercial cover preferably the latter in Lisbon who would also be accredited to i adrid so that he could visit that capital with diplomatic facilities. This officer would be regarded as the head of a Joint Anglo-Amerlean .0. organisation in Jortugal and our representative in Lisbon H.A would as far as hia work in Portugal is concerned   as distinct 3rrom work done in Lisbon for other sections operate under the direction and control of the American Head  of Mission.  The London Agreement of June 1942 expressly provides that a section operating in Lisbon on lines of coromunicatl n into Prance would not be included In any arrangements for collaboration in the Iberian Peninsular proper.  As regards Spain the American Lead in Lisbon when he visited Spain would undertake to act under the control of Y.L. and not to take any intitiativ'e without the latter s knowledge and approval.  We would inform .50 000 that apart from the above arrangements wo have sent an officer from headquartere on an exploratory tom in Portugal with a view to disvoering what economic action could usefully be taken by 5 0.T. e iher of a subversive kind on Its own behalf or on behalf of other depart ents of ii.h G. Any such action would be directed from London would have no connectIon wit' or be In any way under the j rltish S.O.F . representative In Lisbon and would not be considered as ebing covered by this Agreement. -o, , G. is c.ll out to win the Vfcr and G.M. hopes that G will re tain his post.  b t '.Washington there are DH/Y G.M.llO G.H.350 and G 11.1501 together with G.M.300 all working in h's offices. In ITew York there are G.M and G. and the closest contact be tween Washington and hew York is maintained by a system of scrambled tele-printers known as the T.K. invention con sisting of r typewriter working with a one-time pad . The use of the telephone is thus practically excluded. G.ll under G. co-ordinates all S.O. activities and sees all telegrams and visits Washington twice a week His conversations with g. usually take place in the train between Washington and hew York  c Domestic relations in the Liaison Mission -do mestic relations arc perfectly satisfactory both with G. and also Within the L.inison Mission itself  d G.M.300 is doing first-class general liaison work in 'Wf shiagton and is responsible for distributing all tele grams 9 T-IC s and documents. He is liaison both for S.Ol and  S.'I. purposes and has two of Gfs S.I. men working under him.  c Relations with Y.P.9' Admiral Cunningham and F.B.I arc all good  The hew York office is nor/ satisfactory although about 12 men have been eliminated either for return to England or transfer to S.I. or transfer to Canada Relations between S.C. and S.I. are good All S.O.'telegrams pass through G.M. personally and all ..S.I. telegrams pass through G 6. ADMII'ISTRATIOITX Questioned by D/CD a G.M. said.that he proposed that BEhSOh should act as general assistant to G.M. particularly on administration finance and supplies. It was agreed that be fore leaving London he should get familiar with the work of all the Departments concerned. .. 4 7. SECURITYi  a G.M had tightened up matters and a proper system of office passes was now working . All personnel are duly sworn  in D/CD- a pointed out that retiring personnel must also be sworn out. G.M. and AD/U confirmed that all men who had left G's office and. re turndd to England had bfen s. worn out and their office passes had been withdrawn. r'  b Sc curity is the responsibility of S I G.M did not think that he ncedfed'r special S.O security officer. The security of all S.O. Missions is under G ' ''' i.1' .'  c Sir Connop Guthrie is in charge of security for all British Missions in North and South America. British security generally is bad owing to under payment of staff as compared with the cost of living which not only gets officials into debt but causes constant change of secretarial staff. 8. G.50 200 . mmm i ir' i i ' I '  This cf ficCY has how left G s organisation and -is now working in G.2 at the War Department, o  B. C.D. tiicn rr.isGd following points for discussions  l Binr.ncir.l rosponsidilitys-G.K. said that he was not able to cope personally with the financial side hitherto'. he did not propose to investigate the past history hut generally speaking he was satisfied that nothing-was fundamentally wrong Then EBITSO joined him all financial matters would be subject to the sanction of him and G-.K. D/fin .emphasised the need for separating our-S.O. budgets from S.I. budgets G-.M. said that separate accounts were'..kept although both Organisations in New York were housed in the same building. Then 3ENS0N arrived he should ta-kc-full charge -of finance administration and supply which would ensure -proper separation from 8.1   2 0-ntrol of S.T.S. 105s-G M. pointed out that he had recent instructions that S.T.S. 103 was to be taken out of his province and handled .exclusively by D/CD 0 the main reason being that D/CD c objected to' his training personnel being interfered with by G/T from New York. He pointed out that G/T was. now leaving . It was .agreed that G.h. and D/Yin should discuss this matter. C.D ruled that subject to discussion with D/CD 0 on his return the intention was that while D/CD 0 should have exclusive charge af training at S.T.S. 103 financial administration should be done from Hew York It-would therefore have to be considered whether to reverse the recent decision to put into the -hands of D/CD 0 the administration as well as-the training arrangements for S.T.S 103 since the basis of that decision had been altered' by the retirement of G/T. D/CD a said that the only aTtcr eative s wcrc s    a Financial administration under G.'M or  b Financial administration from London through a local representative of D/Fin in Hew York -and that the-second alternative was probably not practicable.   5 SouthAv-mricanremittrnccss-D/Finand G.lvl.areto discuss this question.   4 Supplies -G.M. said th.c. position was unsatisfactory there were numerous contradictions in telegrams from London requests were -received in Hew York from several different See L.ions i O' was impossible lor G lo. personally to goondina.to the supply.problem there were important security aspects since many of our requests at present passed through the hands of the British Purchasing Commission. At thd New York end he pro poses to recruit a local man to work under BENSON exclusively on supplies. AD/U said that from'the L-hdon 'end. he was at present only a post-box for communications' on supply matters from E and other Sections and could not co-ordinate it himself This problem led to -discussion of a wider issue as follows  5 Heirtion between London and-Bchf York -C.D. said that Herds of Missions co-ord water and direct the work of Missions abroad. The responsibility for providing Foreign Missions ..ith supplies normally rests with London. G.H. pointed  out that his mission ..had two 'distinct functionss    a to deal with AD/U s territory Americas -and Far East as the Hew Y rk-rc-presentativcs-of AD/U .  b to ensure co-ordination with American 3.O.E. on all matters in all parts of the world acting in this respdet as the Hew York representatives of S.O.E. as a. whole He mentioned as an example, 's  -4   that he received direct requests from Cairo for supplies but it was agreed by all that direct  action by Cairo was v/rong in principle . -G-.J I. end  AD/U were to discuss this matter further and it  appeared from the discussion that it was necessac J  to consider a major change in the set-up at both  cndsi namely - a one officer in London and one in  hew York to deal solely with the v/ork of AD/U s  present territory. b another officer both in  London arid in New York to deal solely with the co-ordiriation of S.Q.E. and O.S.S   6 Poland  a Polish dollars -Agreed that G.M. and D/Pin should discuss this question of providing Polish dollars for the Poles which was essentially an obligation of the Treasury.  b C.D. said that it was possible that the Poles and the Czechs might try to negotiate with Q . independently of their arrangements with S.O.E and suggested that it might be a&visebl to have one of Q/s officers in London as liaison with IL.X. G.M. said it might be more important to have a representative e f M.X. in New York to be in touch with any proposals in co-operati on there between Q and the Poles and Czechs. Such a representativj could also look after the interests of D/R and S. aswell as MX C.D. emphasised that he would be under G.M's orders. The name cf MO/B was suggested as suitable.  Q/s Suicide Squad -C.D. said he would discuss this matter with Q on arrival.   8 Bag facilities to J.Q -The present position having been explained G.M. said it was worse than useless to ask Q . to approach the State Department on any matter relating to bags since in fact the State Department invariably opened all Bs bags. It was decided that no progress could be made on these lines.  8 Communications Signals and vif/Ti a G.M-. to dLscuss Signals with M/S.  b Regarding T-K communications D/CD a and AD/P to confer regarding the prospects of getting and installing T-K J apparatus and to get confirmation of its security.  c A war station for Western Europe to be discussed betwee.n C.D. and Q .  d W/T training of American operators to be considered by G.M. and M/S who should report to C.D. in time for discussion with Q .  e Main Lind Station -M/S and AD/Y to produce estimate urgently for Treasury purposes   9 Other Missions j/tj.M. to discuss with A.D. and AD/U questions regarding Cape Verde Islands Portugal Spain and Middle East.  10 S.O.E & O.S.S -A.D. and G.M . to settle suitable letters to be exchanged between C.D. and Q . recording ratification., ADP/US/1974 9th September 1 942 To DCD. A From AD/P. I am still not happy about this summary. thought it was agreed that a telegraphic periodical summary w as the ideal method and that the idea of a detailed summary was abandoned. I cannot believe that named agents and persons should be s ent in a document of this sort which may be useful qua its interest to G.M s mission but cannot and should not be a matter of interest in its detailed form to all the Americans. The proposal I would like to see adopted is for a fortnightly cable giving broad details of progress or set backs mentioning no names methods or detailed plans and prepared in such a way that G.M. can say to the Americans we are developing our organization in so and so have succeeded in opening new lines of communication have established contact with a new groupand so on. May I have your views L l cru cA & fb ex. it Yi -Au. A. A. vf trio alt Jc. A . A., /I III  16.9.42. From U. Thank you for your note attached to the draft circular to he issued by C.D with regard to information for G.IJ.'e Mission. This is a distinct improvement and as I understand it the monthly report will be drafted for me by the various Section Heads. With regard to the weekly telegram can it be laid down clearly what exactly this is to contain i.e. if the Section Heads state that they have nothing for the cable does my responsibility cease and am I to take only what Section Heads give me for trans mission j  Also I should like it perfectly clear whether symbols are to be used and whether operations are to be reported or whether the material to be transmitted is purely that affecting general policy.  I am going away for three days leave and will be back on ilonday and provided the circular has been issued by C/D by that time I will approach Section Heads next week in order to inaugurate the weekly cable., , To. Ah. /SW f ru /r b . &-U b/4 c  &  /l d c J Cc A C A /CJ Aa e  O.SA. JLo y, COPY  Sij I  TIOIAjl Cb .  SECRET 3rd September 1942.  Dear CD  With reference to your letter of the 1st Septem ber and further to my letter of the 9th August I con  firm that the Chiefs of Staff having approved of the  agreement for world wide co-operation between S.O.E  and O.S.S. negotiated drring Colonel Donovan s visit to  London there is no objection to informing Colonel  Donovan of this in exchange for 'a similar ratification  of the Agreement on the part of the United States Joint  Chiefs of Staff.  Yours sincerely  C. hollis. 2 i'itzmaurice Place Berkeley Square W.l., ADP/XX/21oO. 16th September To jlD. From AD/P.  Admiral Godfrey is going to the U.S.A. on the 21st September and has conveyed through D/Navy an offer to do anything for us in the U.S.A that is possible for him to undertake. Though T do not think that anybody will wish to bother him it might be of considerable value to ask GM. to get into touch with him and to play up to his well known foibles. W  C-L  ote   C I t'  -t 4  f- uJi.   /O', RKCpKtJ OJ piStQXmijm tffaX WlTg J vVy ' .. . . dbi'ICZ O'l 12 9 42. Tl hog prefeint were Sir. ylairlee Itabrp Cploxsel X tteTpR Goloii Taylor Hr illll n . y - Salonol Traaok Colonel Cu  -'r i. Ceswick i-pi.  Ti folloilVig'Taatters eftiioh hM Ooen ral-so4 by .Sir CherleB liasibro in a letter to Colonel bonov&o of tli 10th SopteMber-wore discussed -fjo] 1 go -cigc fi .038S i ' ip VSo''  0. -p['it iWsapegrae4 lri. principle that tliere should be only on I sttiff and eqttlJpaeni which GoioncI Donovan d./ ht .desire to Sord be .Hpiariti . . 1 p e  ' bn ifph. . . vi r.ki&sd i. lw rmrts a In tho ii/il-ikely oveht -hf t Co si.Jid of 'Military horcos operntln  frow Great Britain heinr' diyidod .. it would bo ppaoible fear -tliebo--two'parts to b.c. tuinilsd into .Inde ridorit stations.   Tsciiixioal 5ftspecta-'of -eeribue Jii setions -ariaii. .out of tT t AOarlB o-persomol-'and etjuip ni far t Station should dieduapad ae epop ns nosalble by the vhl f Officer 0f ' ' Colcnol Jscuho 1th Golouol GuoatljeSp nno-ie Chief Officer tb.'.bu .nppointed ti -- - f . - Cs aon  b .t was agreed 'Sh&t -ebere ah .. o onx triu esm&hllahi snt jf o n boti -nltinh jL-Gl oei .is of met ' .. . .to  i..s cussed by foloael Osarho wi Jolehei -Gtseiather and. the -' .hi s  .  e ihiist it was fej i recllited tiaat there WaS. a frlfeie facie .ve / case for th 2 view that in eacL corifcre there should be one War Station under th cOht-rol of the p&r ty witii -the predominate interests is the urea -in juooti n it was ne'vorthieloas. aefread tiist before aiy.final-decision-is taken the tcchnioal aspectsof the question-ate uld b fully .discussed tetwceii Colonel i rkl'the 'Gwh.O. ef tho ' S hissio . 'particuiBrly in - flow of. the possible bdvantage of hevlaag two inatnllatlor.s ae ayaindtthe dieadventages of duplication of equipaant spaoe poraor i ots . - d . .iliet it was. agreed that there should bobonly on Main' Lina -ufcafcism-in ' reet isrtt JiT to eo awilcatc 'wl-ifc h airi. hine '''  to'tiens attached to ar Bfc-atioite abroad it was -also 'a poed . tii3. t i. 1 . ho bix ci bo left for each party to decide for Itself, , 3   /'iich he proposed 0.3 3 or fcrdar tioirv ln -5crtw al sai. it .perfom wtt2i tiK l l /6ti. far &3 . aetlccl of tbo QKls.t lug u cl- &xmv'j .O.f indicated at 0 icc .tii5it ln-t iel3P opinion tli-asa ystivlt 'i i6 -.  .h& luain have -t eeheist r   a -dropai-atioii ' of poat-occu fetiojial corsn-xiicat'1.ona 1 .  i e . to le ave beMrid 'o/T sots in ' the h&i&s of reliable '-f itlah \ jret of a. echars for showiivd up ''b -b' hatioissl polio om g n raily ''aM i ih.ihlg doriaan i '  - -s to how country. tii rda' ay oetald h. it hsip tc xarbe .Op- p.. .1.1. put forw ward ou0 ihi i hs --c . y.-p in. t hat v  v .p   ctoxlift blOok .cuasrcrioy r&speetiveiy as req-l.r c .up to the ealue of a million poujvis aiaply as a. bcok-entpy ' tlhia -obvlalin-.- .a&. iie eaeaiiy. of tlie ourohAae of these curre ' c hy eoch. party  t was agreed tiu . bev oander Vcsapr altcuid di scuaa tiiis   ddf dlf o c-apfceraber 194S,  AD/94. 17th September 1042 TO CAESAR. PROM A/D.  I attach hereto a cooy of a Record of Discussions hold with G.00 000 on 12.9.42. This Record after boln approved by C.D. was sent to hr. Phillips for confirmation. We have now received a reply fro . hr. Phillips' in which he states that whilst he himself has no reason to believe that the hinutes do not represent accurately the conclusions reached at the' meeting he considers the matter is of such importance that it would be well for Ifm to have the approval of G.50 000 himself. He has consequently sent the Record to Washington by air mail and asked G.50 003 to telegraph his approval As there are some matters in the Record which call for action on your part C.D. has instructed me that we should treat the itocord as if it were approved and proceed at once to carry out any action for which r..O.E. is responsible. Will you please therefore take the necessary action in connection with paragraph 4 and let me have in due course a draft paper containing concrete suggestions as to the functions which the proposed 0.S.5 orgaiiisation in Portugal might perform. -OOo, 17th Septejatoer. 1742. s-A. Copy to I c.ttaolx ho'j fto a oopjf ' -of PlACUjEialona hold wltli 6 0 007 on 25 5 . . . ' -' ' 3 tla H9tsQ&G s after'ho Inr approved by c vub-sent' '-%Q'   &for on.  - 1 o v e li&VT now received e reply fr'om Er CMlllpe in which i atates that 'whilst ioo 1 hr.elf no reason 'to--belieye-that the hlnutee do not represent -eccurately the conclusions readied at the rsieetingj he eonelders the mutter is.of sncl-In.-ortimoe that It woxild he well for Mm/to hove the approval of-.Ct&O oOO' himself IS has conaoQossstly cent the Kecord t ashincton air me11 and shed 1.50 .xic tc telecraph hia approval there-' are ir wpoordwi 2h call for action on your - -i h s instructed ms titat w al cul4 treat tlso.-iecord as if -ft-were r.ppx cv tl trvl roccocT rt o'-oo to .carry out-- any actios for riiich j r is responsible -'C  X All thw matter i.-a rarh 1 C-r hh f are meily  within 70 ur Sj.hero and tl.orofofe -.assui'vs . tl at y. u uili -.five tiio n000as-uy ' .ctx 01o. titia tmlm  wv  With referonce to sub . aph e 'of paragraph 1 1 should be grateful .if .K. . uorore as discussea. this ..imatter-u .o v - i. ... ... -.. -or j- i us-001iOSi 0 th 1 0. MiaMoa.-directors .ls ividuhliy - jsc ... that woV-oah.-af - upon a  policy as tc tha erectics of tar tations abroad. 2. . Ac re sards para mph t . Aebcrd' has. been dcliber tcl at ohctchy foi' security reaso'ss The actual . tsi5d ts tthleh we ilscuesod .with d b'- eoo .were in t-rder of prX riby finally accida . '  A .  c hydro-olectril poser stct.lon ircnafcrricr station jfc W winlilrj  Tlv o   V / . '- c f. . s u oelsvia. It is i to a end b that have undertaken to. -get out detedied ' plehi. -i o rb 3. pat. tc v. b.0- 3iQ for suteiesicn ' by him to the Joint Chiefs of ifcoff ho fcct-ibh canine -w ri iii S Dor frepaa mihoa wo - Lhar report fren-c-c -h ir th Oonortbi  s.Siailcvio . end-wc dc-ubt ca pect to.-be in.a position 'iti sail the i opositioxi'fully to ihailovie for at least another sIje weeks ' 5. Since . the disausslcnu on Saturday C l/ -lias sent rss cnother ' tarseb whibh.. he. atatea -shculd be added to'the-above lift p- ' P. .0., hi tljis 3i-r.'.c T/sy as a aaad Cb . ibis ia ono oa -talien C.oaa val p&LXv&fts/ enS attach hereto a copy-of U paper cent tc a . I do aot Isipw horc It orlglnafcod. ' l afffTirao you ill b r . .ole fei wv.A. Jr .i3E st3mctto.ng fcp have pliiao orhcd'out targata C&l a d  the . ne referred to txam -iy abov yOOOy, A'/j  AD/95 17th September 1942.  TOi D/HV. PROM A/D.  X attach hereto a copy of a Record of Discussions held with G.50 000 on 12.9.42.  This Record after being approved by C.D. was sent to Mr. Phillips for confirmation.  We have now received a reply from Mr. Phillips in which he states that whilst he himself has no reason to believe that the Minutes do not represent accurately the conclusions reached at the meeting he considers the matter is of such importance that it would be well for him to have the approval of G.50 000 himself. He has consequently sent the Record to Washington by air mail and asked G.50 000 to telegraph his approval.  C.D. has instructed me that we should treat the Record as if it were approved and proceed at once to carry out any action for which S.O.E. is responsible. Your attention is drawn to paragraph 2. MIDDLE EAST but no action is required by you at present.  oOo, ADLT/US/380. //y 19th Saptember 1942. TO C.D. / PfiCM AD/iJ.  Copies to Ubj D/PIW. I sena herewith a memorandum which I wrote about GM.17S and which I have discussed with B.C.D A .  On the latter s instructions I wrote the attached letter setting out GM.175 8 appointment Copies of this have gone to Hew York to A.D. and to D/FIN., as 00 101 3 ation' to, , 26th. June 1942   'AmtrrAf Jnr   ttAmeamJLt, mj/iM/sm&ai iQth 194s TO Glu 176 FitMS AL/U Copios to8-C.Df DXmB A A D I/FII OM.  fjn f mi dmp&rturm to tak up your api rflst a ot in S 0 Mm Yoife 1 want to oxaflm your ctotios i-smk and pay. I lav aeon .0 4 A i krdUag your rank i must apoioclss to u for giving you ti iiaprossion tlat you wouM hoM th rank of Uaioo in your capacity aa wSo 2tt to CK in Saw York AXthou n too Mieeion in tlio unifeed otetae Is military in onasuefear and fell abroad ISatablisiaasaife for uoadqimrfeors proviso for & 5 s 0 l and a sasabos of 0 0 6 it is not considarod advisable at proaont to apply to the War offieofWii oh holde th sol rl it  of promotion t fi M r i In your mm m soon after your  4oining S o S and in vie of the fact that until too nontiis you held the rank of Lloutafmnt-  I am fei r for instructed by 0 C A to onfina th following to you  Your dutios You will fin the appolnferaott of nlki&n to CM in S0 E Y .Yon will too respomlblo uMor m for tiio finance of . to S 0 Yissioo in tei America keep a ooial watch on e eiadituro applicable to tho Am rieaa in the emm way a D/flB  pc fox is fills duty tor in London for all to.o B activities You will b rosponaibl under m for stores and also for tin general efeiniatration of tbs offloe  la to absence of CB you will be in charge of the Sew Yoxfe Offie under G s gsnoral diroetlon authority  Rank Ytu will ppo 4 to il w York as a BritMl Oto enm nt &fl lal teakliii hp an assignuMit with to director of beeurl r Go-ox dlnatioii in Low Yoxk Ym will retain your ecssaisgion If you ftad it necessary to wear tmiforsa yea will wear tii f pip w of a v apfeaia Your Lay Although you will only have tto rank of a Captain you will m entitled to draw the pay and idlcwasscos of a Major, a i/r   JVD/llO. 1st October 1942.  CD via DCD/A. Prom A/D.  As requested by H/B I confirm that a copy of the Summary of the agreement with O.S.S. or the relevant extract therefrom has been sent to the Heads of all Missions with the exception of Russian Mission., /   '  CD/34G8. 6th. October To -ALL DIRECTORS and REGIONAL HEADS S SN. J. Erom -G.D DIRECTIVE PROGRESS REPORTS FOR G.M. TO SHOW TO O.S.S These Reports if they are to be of any value to G.M or O.S.S. must cover in a general way the following points  1 A general summary of the sabotage effected in each particular country provided that no mention is made of the place or district in which any individual act occurred  2 There might be special exceptions to this Proviso it. There is then ho harm in telling O.S.S at the proper time that it was an S.O.E. job.  3 We should give a general summary of progress made in delivering materials e.g. 4 successful sorties and the dropping of 12 containers but of course without indicating the district or the number of men dropped  4 We should indicate in very general terms the progress of our Organisation in occupied countries but without dis closing any particulars which could point to its identity or location.  5 We should mention progress in subversive propaganda  e.g. Distribution to German troops in the Balkans and any points of interest on the morale in any country and the development of German C.E  6 We should mention our relations with exiled allied Governments and interesting high lights on the progress made in training'students of various nationalities in this country or overseas  7 Generally we are aiming at producing a report which shows the part which S.O.E is playing in organising resistance in occupied countries and any general political social or economic survey should be of a specialised nature and should not include news which can be obtained in a better and fuller form from other sources. Our Progress Report must be treated as a report of one specialised organisation for the benefit of another. While we should record our failures which may be a warning for the future we should bear in mind that our first object is to produce a document to keep our own representatives up to date so as to give O.S.S. good educational information and sufficient data about ourown operations to help them and us to get what we want from the American Authorities., ]