[, S CU irY CooPteOTiO u3H H O-S. I iup.-a-,  25183 Wl.23572/3634 100 000 7/43 A.&.E.W.Ltd. Gp.698  26508 Wt.4S858/4502 100 000 1/44 J.5286 '16/// s/ .  NO MINUTES TO BE WRITTEN ON THIS JACKET  r BRANCH MEMORANDA B.M. COVER  Unregistered Reference Number of Subject. Originating Branch.  S /FOa6iTVi J/lfa44 1 VI CA MJt NOTES ON THE USE OF BRANCH MEMORANDA  See paragraphs 160166 Office Instructions 1943 1. The existedfce and movements of a B.M. unlike those of a registered file rare NOT recorded by Registry. 2. B.Ms. may ONLY be used as   a ENCLOSURE 'B.Ms.For action bn letters or other important pipers when the appro priate registel d file is not available. When it is essentiajffor a branch to obtain quickly the viasys of a number of other branches and thope branches are not likely to need to refer' to the file in order to formulate their views it is often appropriate to send  Enclosui/e B.Ms. simultaneously to each suofi branch. Enclosure B.Ms. or the substance on hem must be enclosed in the registered file at the first opportunity.  & INTERNAL DISCUSSlt N B.Ms.For domestic recaras or discussions within a direc torate etc. or for other preliminary soundings on &ny questions which may or may not at a later stage require a registered file.  c COVERS FOR UNIMPORTANT LETTERS ETC.B.M. covers may be used when a jacket is essential for unlteistered correspondwice unlikely to involve much inter branch discussion. 3. If a B.M. has or acquires any gtfoeral importsyjfce the branch concerned should link the B.M. to a registered file at the earliest possible momenjnn one of the following ways  a By sending the complete B.M. to bet gistered and thus raised to the status of a registered file  5 By transferring the B.M. as an endosureltrf'a registered file. 4. The branch originating a B.M. must be ffi prmed if the B.M. is registered or inserted in a registered file by another branch. Referred to Date Referred to Date Referred to Date /, ct ] / MOST SBGK3T.  To -The Secretary J.I.C.  Prom -The Secretary Inter-Services W/T Security Committee.  To provide adenuate W/T deception ejid cover plans to meet operational requirements my Committee consider that it will he necessary in the future to have the co-operation of United States forces in this country.  2. It is therefore intended to co-opt United States representatives to the Committee as necessary from time to time provided of course that the J.I.C. has no objection to this course.  Signed M.Davenport.  Lt.Cdr. R.N.V.R.  Acting Secretary  Inter-Services W/T  Security Committee.  2nd August 1943, COPY/   f   bsT SSCR5T  JIC/1 161/  MR. CAVEKDIBH-BEHTINCK  D.N.I. D.M.I. A.C.A.S. I . BRIGADIER SIR STEWART MENZIES. m. TURNER. I attach a copy of a Minute I received from the Inter-Services W/T Security Committee I should he grateful if you would inform me if you are prepared to agree to the proposal contained therein I have asked for the views of the Controlling Officer on this matter.   Sgd DENIS CAPEL-DUNN.  5th August. 19h3.   rm -..ter'V 7 -. Pleas eonoider with G C & 0.3 If necessary  SGD S.G.Menzies 7/3, ft  iferXjxiww.  /]/\Aj2 t fcv 5vjvv odyl f  ClUi S Aa SiLaJ  f o, 4 MOST SECRET.  Signals Journal Broadway Bldgs Broadway. if  s.w.i.  4 August 8th 1 9i 3. D. D. S Please see attached note from Secretary Inter-Services W/T Security Committee. Will you let me have your views in accordance with 0.S.S. s request.  A. L. Harris \ Brigadier.  M A lAtl Cm A-i, M  4 MOST c 3RET  iTtii August I9k3  Chairman Y Board.  Reference the attached correspondence I enggeot  the following reply   Your J.I.C/1161/43 I agree to U.S. representation on the lnter-3ervlce vV/T Security Coraaittee as necessary provided that information derived from Special Intelligence is not discussed when the U.S.  representative is present.N I have read this over to Travis who agrees.  /H rt AsjrtH4 A5 '-',  25133 Wt.23572/3034 100.000 7/43 A.&.E. W.Ltd. Gp.698  26508 Wt.48858/45'92 100 000 1/44 .. J.o286  NO MINUTES TO BE WRITTEN ON THIS JACKET BRANCH MEMORANDA B.M. COVER Unregistered Reference Number of Subject. Originating Branch. S Cur ry MSSt-H/r / NOTES ON THE USE OF BRANCH MEMORANDA  See paragraphs 160166 Office Instructions 1913 1. The existciSee and movements of a B.M. unlike those of a registered filjfare NOT recorded by Registry. 2. B.Ms. may OlsfSLY be used as  . ENCLOSURE-Ms.For action on letters or other important Papers when the appro priate regist gd file is not available. When it is essential for a branch to obtain quickly the vS s of a number of other branches and thafe branches are not likely to need to refenfeo the file in order to formulate their views it is often appropriate to send  EnelostH e B.Ms. simultaneously to each such branch. Enclosure B.Ms. or the substance on hem must be enclosed in the registered file at the first opportunity.  . INTERNAL DISCUSSION B.Ms.For  domestic records or discussions within a direc torate etc. or for other preliminary soundings on imy questions which may or may not at a later stage reqiifee a registered file.  c COVERS FOR UNIMPORTANT LETTERS ETC B.M. covers may be used when a jacket is essential for uil gistered correspond fi'ce unlikely to involve much inter branch discussion. 3. If a B.M. has or acquires any general importance the branch concerned should link the B.M. to a registered file at the earliest possible moment in one of the following ways  . By sending the complete B.M. to be'igegisteretUand thus raised to the status of a registered file  . By transferring the B.M. as an enclosur dq S registered file. 4. The branch originating a B.M. must be iMormed if the B.M. is registered or inserted in a registered file by another branch. Referred to Date Referred to Date Referred to Date, 113  M0TE3 OP TUB PHOPOSHD FLAN POIi THE OFExulTION OP U.S. AIR Y UltlTS AT U.S. AIR CKMiANP H.Q j AFTER DISCUSSION BETWEEN MAJOR ALLHT AMD  D.D.I.A. -30TH JUNK 1943. I. Cagngi L COHSI&gUTICKTS. The Y Units concerned consist of three Platoons each equipped with six W T interception receivers and each Platoon borne on the strength of one of the three U 3 Air Cosmand Headquarters. It is not considered that six  W.T. sets alone can produce an Intelligence W.T.I. service of direct use to a Command Headquarters. Furthermore it appears to be unnecessary in this country to duplicate comprehensive work already being done by the Cheadle organisation.  itate of the Units -The first Platoon is now about to complete its training under U.J. arrangements and is available for operational work. The other two Platoons are just arriving and will be ready for operational work on about 1st of October 1943.  II. PROFOdALS. In view of considerations above and of the fact that Cheadle has need of facilities for cover which at present cannot be taken through lack of setsjj the following proposals have been formulated for agreement   a The role cover at present taken by the Cheadle orgenisationj at Tean Hear Cheadld If possible   b The three Motet At present Tean appears to have sufficient acooramodation for the    full eighteen sets but difficulties arise in the matter of billeting.]   c The cover to be taken by the U.3. contingent to be agreed between. the 0/0. U.S. Contingent Tean and 0/C W.T. Station Cheadlej  d That ' Intelligence as required be supplied to the U.S. Air Formation Headquarters through the same channels as those used by the British Command Headquarters i.e. operational intelliger by direct landline from Cheadle Medium term intelligence via D.D.I.3 and D.D.I.4. HI. ACTION TO BE TahHl IP AgHBSMSflr IS REACHED UPON THE ABOVE PROPOaALS.   a The W.T.I. Platoon of U.S. Bomber Command already trained should take over the W.T. station and existing accommodation at Tean. It is understood that the U.d. Authorities would apply for the necessary transfer of the billeting area assigned to them. Note The buildings are at present on the charge of the local Home Guard who will be clear of them during the first week in August.   b With the arrival of the other two Platoons on about 1st of October the personnel involved at Tean will amount to approxi mately 130 Officers and men. It appears necessary therefore that an Immediate reconnaissance of existing accommodation and billeting should be made and additional accommodation huts etc. applied for if required. /IV., iv. ai coi mabd Ha UAHTSiis. la tiie interests of obtaining full value from available W.T.I. at Command Headquarters and also In the important interest of security it is thought necessary to maintain one or two U S. W.T.I. Officers at each Command Headquarters. The proposed direct landline from Cheadle to the Commands would terminate at this officer who on the one hand would be in a position to explain where necessary the Intelligence received and to advise the Command Intelligence Officer as to what was available. This would be in addition to his function aa a W.T.I. security Officer. V. AOTIOH. If this need is agreed it is thought that suitable W.T.I. Officers should now-be earmarked and sent to Cheadle for training in the organ satioi0/C. Cheadle la prepared to accept six /T Officers or men as soon as they are available. This number is to include members of the cryptographicstaff see paraVl whilst under training. VI. GiOtPTQ&lLyli STAgF The small cryptographic staff associated with the Platoons would be located with the existing staff at Cheadle and take part in the general work of that Section., Form 348 Medium / Brigadier Jl.Lw Harris Signals Journal Broadway Buildings Broadway S.W.l. 9th July 1943. A.I.4/49.  American Co-operation  The attached paper sets out the method in which it is proposed to employ certain small American W/T. I. units in the work of the-Cheadle organisation.  2. Before passing it to the TT.S. Y authoritiesfor agreement your confirmation is requested that the plan is in line with general policy. 3.-G.C. and C.S officially on the matter.   dp .5 . Group Captain  D.D.I.4. Wt 39220 2467 6 DOOM. 12/41 V.B. St1070,  ls C v VVvv JlJC Vv 'O r pilL j/3 / . uvJt fiju-j loL fUtUL g-L 0 vw/v WC S jJU SvA t. BW/I., v D'& z   4 't w-t.  r-v-'- ' 0 1 ' '''i' 4 v -j Oj V 'O --V Q- - \c I  Co I Qv 4 c  Dj.m . w fi -V f v.w  '-'. uu r i-ih fc - -11 JV 'V . a- wc --V., FOOD CONTROL NATIONAL RATIONING . AMENDMENTS TO R.G.M.6 Instructions to Food Retailers other than Butchers .  KOSHER  MARGARINE. After paragraph 44 the following paragraph should be inserted  44A  Kosher  Margarine. If you desire to obtain  Kosher  margarine you must make application on a separate copy of Form Margarine 1 for an amount based on the ration requirements of your customers who ask for this margarine. The word Kosher  should be written in large capital letters across the top of the form. You will receive from the local Food Office a buying permit on a separate 'orm Margarine 2 marked  Kosher which should be sent to your supplier as authority to supply the amount specified. SUGAR. For paragraphs 49. 50 and 51 the following paragraphs should be substituted  49 How to obtain Supplies. Applications for supplies of sugar must be made on form S.l. This form will be forwarded to you by the local Food Office with your Licence to Trade. You will not be permitted to purchase from more than one supplier. 50. Only present buyers of 100 tons or more in Scotland 50 tons or more of sugar at a time from refiners will be allowed to register direct with refiners. Buyers of weekly quantities of 5 tons or more but of less than 100 tons in Scotland of less than 50 tons of sugar at a time will be required to register with a wholesaler or dealer. Buyers of weekly quantities of less than 5 tons will be required to register with a supplier within their Food Division. This will not apply to Scotland. In cases where supplies are now obtained through wholesalers or dealers they will continue to be obtained from one wholesaler or dealer. 51. You will receive notification from the local Food Office on form S.2 of the quantity of sugar which you may purchase weekly. This form must be sent by you with your order to the supplier named thereon and will be his authority to supply you. AMENDMENTS TO FORMS. On form S.l the heading  Quantity to be obtained from each Supplier should read  Quantity to be obtained from named Supplier. On form S 3 under letter C  s should be omitted after  supplier. MINISTRY OF FOOD October 1939. 1698. Wt. 33371/4121. 1 000 000. 10/39. K.H.K. Gp 440.,  MOST SECRET  AZ/695  1st August 1943  Dear Harris  In reply to your note of July 12th enclosing Memo from Fitch on the subject of Bicher1s operators going to Gheadle I believe that Travis mentioned the matter to Bicher and explained that some of the personnel at Cheadle had access to material to which we should not wish and Bicher I gather concurs in this the U.S. officers to see.  This situation will be relieved when the particular portion of Cheadle's activities that entail passing this information to that station is removed to B.P. It is hoped that this may take place about the beginning of September.  Would it perhaps be agreeable to Colonel Bicher if the sending of his men to Cheadle could be delayed until this move of our personnel has taken place.  Yours sincerely.  Brigadier A.L. Harris  Signals Journal Broadway Buildings Broadway  S.W.l., most secret Signals Journal Broadway Buildings Broadway S.W.1. 6th August 1S43-  Air Ministry Referenoe your JJU-AS dated 7th JULy 1943 and our oonrorsatiatx please see attached copy of letter from D.D 3 . 1   A 4. iiftiteis .   Brigadier. I, , ArijJrJuJ h  Signals Journal  Broadway Buildings  Broadway S.\7 l0 To Members 5Y1 Committee.  r  From '-Chairman.'  The attached Memorandum from I5.I 8 on training of  U.S. Personnel is forwarded for your Information and discussion at the Y8 Committoe meeting on Wednesday next Lieut -Colonel Bicher has not yet been aslced to attend as the question if security policy in U.S.A may be involved D D S is  Brigadier., / COPY The War Office5  London S.W.l.  19th October 1942  M I 8/A.2177  The Chairman SECRET  Y Committee.  Training of U.S. Personnel.  We have received requests from the U.S Authorities in this theatre for assistance in W/T. I training both by the attachment of a competent officer and the provision of any papers which we may have on the subject and we have complied with both these requests in so far as we are able to do so.  2. Arising out of the papers we have given to them the U.S. Authorities'are now ashing which if any can be sent to the States. 3. It is not felt however even if this request were granted that much benefit would be gained as papers on the subject of W/T. HX are few and most of the training is done by actual experience and by lecture. 4. It would seem therefore that the solution to providing the II S. forces with a groundwork on W.f. I11 training would best be met by sending to the States.a competent British officer for a short period who would train the nucleus of an Instructor Staff. 5. It is suggested that this subject should be discussed at an early meeting of the t Yn Committee and that Lieutenant- Colonel Bioher be ashed to attend. Signed F.W. NICH0L1S  Colonel G-.S., C 6/113  Telephone further communication on this subject should be addressed to  The Under-Secretary of State The War Office  as opposite and the following number quoted. -i- 8/7T2/77 Your Reference. THE WAR OFFICE LONDON S.W.1. 19th October 1942. The Chairman SECRET.  Y Coim.'dttee. Training of U.S. Personnel. We have received requests from the U.3. Authorities in this theatre for assistance in W/T. I training both by the attachment of a competent officer and the provision of any papers which we may have on the subject and we have complied with both these requests in so far as we are able to do so. 2. Arising out of the papers we have given to them the U.S. Authorities are now asking which if any can be sent to the States. 3. It is not felt however even if this request were granted that much benefit would be gained as papers on the subject of W/T. I are few and most of the training is done by actual experience and by lecture. 4. It would seem therefore that the solution to providing the U.S. forces with a groundwork on W.T. I training would best be met by sending to the States a coirpetent British officer for a short period who wjould train the nucleus of an Instructor Staff. 5. It is suggested that this subject should early meeting of the Y Coimnittee and that Lieutenant-Colonel Bicher be asked to attends Colonel G.S f Uy - 1 // 4 u QLA X6 // i, r  I'H  Signals Journal Broadway Buildings Broadway S.W.I.  29th September 1942.  Lieut.Colonel Vernham.  M.I.8 War Office. Reference your Memorandum M.I.8/B.2635 of 16th September this matter was referred to D.D. S . A reply has now been received and is attached herewith. rigadie  Brigadier. Chairman Y Committee., MOST SECRET.  Chairman . XL.Commlttge...  Reference M.I.8/B2635 of 16tia September 1942 dealing with the issue of certain rY material for training purposes to Lt.Col.Bicheri   1. We agree that the callsign boohs should be issued. The fact that whilst these boohs are captured documents and therefore not highly secret our knowledge of the method of working them must be considered as Most Secret has been pointed out personally to Lt.Col.Bicher. 2. The daily and weekly Beaumanor reports are not training documents whilst a non-current copy is valuable to indicate the form in which such reports are compiled current issues only come into use when interception of  K.rads. .gy phe.r t a f1c is being carried on.  3. We have suggested to M.I.8 that the training of American W/T.I. personnel be divided into two categories a Compilation personnel for the fixed Station  high grade to be trained at Beaumanor with access to the Beaumanor Reports.   b W/T.I. personnel for field units to be trained at Trowbridge where the Beaumanor Reports will not be required. 4. We have no objection to the issue of the other docum nts mentioned and shall be glad to assist as required in the matter of Security instructions.  Sgd\ N. de Grey.  2/th September 1942, Reference M.I.8/B2635 of 16th September 1942 dealing with the issue of certain Y material for training purposes to Lt. Col. Bicher  1. We agree that the callsign books should be issued. The fact that whilst ttiese books are captured documents and therefore not highly secret our knowledge of the method of working them must be considered as Most Secret has been pointed out personally to Lt. Col. Bicher. 2. The daily and weekly Beauaanor Reports are not training documents whilst a non-current copy is valuable to indicate die form in which such reports are compiled current issues only cone into use when interception of high grade cypher traffic is being carried on. 3. We have suggested to M.I.8 that the training of American W/T.I. personnel be divided into two categories a Compilation personnel for the fixed Y Station  high grade to be trained at Beaumanor with access to the Beaumanor Reports.  b W/T.I. personnel for field units to be trained at Trowbridge where the Beaumanor Reports will not be required. 4. We have no objection to the issue of the other documents mentioned and shall be glad to assist as required in the matter of Security instructions. 2 th Sepbanber 1942, Signals Journal Broadway Buildings BROADWAY S.W.l.  24th September 1942  N. de Grey Esq B P Reference our 'phone conversation this after  noon on Memorandum from M.I.8. ref M.I.8./B.2635 of 16th September would you please be good enough to forward your comments regarding the issue of Call Sign Books etc proposed by M.I.8  Chairman 'Y' Committee, ys/lii/   Telephone THE WAR OFFICE further communication on this inject sjK uld be addressed to  ic Under-Secretary of State The War Office LONDON S.W.l.  as opposite and the following number quoted. M.I.8/B.2655 MOST SECRET 16th September 1942.  You Reference. Memorandum for -   Ghairman9 'Y' Committee  In order that U.S. R.I. Companies and Platoons arrivingin this country can be trained efficiently we propose handing to Lieutenant-Colonel Etcher of the Special Intelligence Section the follov/ing material  Call Sign Books Army and G-.A.F. Beaumanor Reports Daily   ' Weekly Rewritten version of Y Handbook and Supplement. Papers prepared by G.G '& C.S. and M.I.8. in recognition  of enemy traffic. All Security instructions issued by G.C. & C.S. and M.I.8 All papers on enemy organization prepared by M.I.8.  The point on which we want a decision is really the issue of the Call Sign Books as without these the Beaumanor Reports are of little value.  Will you please there' earls'-date  Copy to -D.D. S, Signals Journal Broadway Buildings BROADWIY S.W.l.  24th August 1942.  Mj I  With reference to your MI8/B 2635 dated 16th August 1942 and telephone conversations  Brigadier Harris -Colonel Nicholls D.D. S suggests that the present course be restricted to A only and that 'B' and 'C be reconsidered to include instruction in air interception in collaboration with the R A F  You may wish to discuss this subject at the next Y meeting.  4.M. Brigadier Chairman Y Committee  Copy to D D. S ., , Telephone 1 -3 1' i THE WAR OFFICE  Anwfurther communication on this subje t hould be addressed to  g The Under-Secretary of State The War Office LONDON S.W.1.   as opposite and the following number quoted. M.I.8./B.2635 SBCI ST 1 6th August 1942. Your Reference. . Memorandum for -  Chairman Y Committee. Training Course for U.S.A. Y Personnel 1. Herewith a suggested programme with three explanatory memoranda covering the proposed training course of U.S.A. Y personnel. 2. In order that the scope of the course be clearly defined an authoritative rating A B or  C as defined in Memorandum No.2 is required. 3. It will be appreciated that Grade A corresponds to the normal W/T I knowledge of a B 1 Type Section Grade B to that of an A Type Section and C represents the highest grade of pure W/T I the latter being obviously the ultimate desirable goal. 4. As it is intended to open the course not later than Monday next 24th August 1942 your early decision will be appreciated. Colonel G.S, Subject Americans' Training Course  MEMORANDUM NO.1.  It is intended to treat all matters from an entirely W/T I view point. No mention of G.C.& C.S. at B.P. will be made. No.6 Intell igence School and British Y Stations will be treated as a closely allied grouping when mentioned. It will be necessary if grade C is applied to use all the E & P Colour names and to be supplied by N0.6.I.S. with Discriminants to the same extent as British Y Stations.  E will be defined as a 6 letter indicator 5 letter Machine cipher  P will be defined as Hand key -5 letter cipher .  Reference to units will be made only when 1 documents or publication in the Press have made them known or 2 the minor codes reveal them.  The closest security will be observed regarding all Most Secret matters. The appearance of any leakage arising from the reasoning or imagination of trainees will be reported and guidance sought as to suitable action. If in spite of full precautions this happens responsibility cannot be accepted., Subject Americans' Training Course  MEMORANDUM HO.2.  Scope of Programme.  The Americans' Training Course will not have the advantage of using and seeing an established Y station except for possible brief visits. Nor will the personnel be proceeding to an already established Y centre where any laclc of experience on their part might be filled out by con tact with more experienced staff.  A model station will have to be created and the I work done upon its products. It is presupposed that the personnel are good operators and have been ehosen as potential instructors.  The programme is designed therefore to create a working model station and a working Intelligence section as the first stage. In its later stages it is intended to widen the scope of the Intelligence work to cover the aspects of W/T I which have been found practicable and valuable. The maSCLmum scope intended is shown in the subjects tested for treatment at the end of the programme .  The programme is applicable in three graded sets of conditions   A Low Grade corresponding to 3 type section a mobile section tactical in scope dealing in minor codes cognisant of ciphers for distinction purposes only.  B Medium Grade corresponding to A type section a semi-stationery section tactical-strategical in scope larger in personnel w ll connected to higher Y centres observing and doing W/T I on  F and E if specially authorised dealing with F Cryptograph ically .  c High Grade. Full scale interception keeping long term record engaged on long term W/T I on all ciphers and codes. if spec ially authorised in close liaison with G.C.& C.S. i.e. forwarding traffic and accepting some measure of cover control . NB. All three Grades can be treated from W/T I angle only.  It is intended that the trainees should be able to turn instructors and expand the Model Y group into several groups of the grade on which the programme is applied or grades below ifi any ., , Subject Americans' Training Course.  1st Week PHOGRAMME  Day 1.  Day 2.  Day 3.  Day 4. Day 5.  Day 6.  Introduction Security. Y Service. Objects. Methods. Elementary German Procedure Distinguishing German material. Use of Q code & procedure Practice. Examples. Codes Ciphers. General distinction and description. Appearance of German Codes & Ciphers Practice and examples. Logs Messages. General distinction. Review of Log-reading. Practical Log Reading Instruction. ' This follows daily for the major part of each Day 9 . day until German Army Organisation Log Reading Instruction. German Air Force Organisation. Log Reading Instruction Callsign Systems Log Reading Instruction., 2nd Week  Day 8. Review of previous wgek.  C.R.R. or Section arrangement. Description of either British G.R.R. Grade B Grade C or British B type Section  Grade A B Log Reading Day 9. Frequencies. Measurement. Naming. Reconciliation. Allocation Habits etc. Log Reading.  After this day time is given daily to Practice -Minor codes and less to log reading  Day 10. Minor Codes and Clear text. Detailed description. Instructions for breaking down. Private Study Minor Codes Log Reading. Day 11. G.A.F. Reporting and Observing Oeganisation Practice Minor Codes  Log Reading  Day 12. Practice Minor Codes Log Reading Day 13. Practice Minor Codes  Bog Reading Security   according to Grade,  r    3rd Week  Day 15.  Day 16.  Day 17.  Day 18.  Day 19.  Day 20.  Day 21.  Review of previous /eek.  Discussion. Organisation of C.R.R. or Section see note on Day 8 Setting up of working conditions.  Activity Reports. Set Control.  Practical working with practice Minor Codes and Log reading. P/F. Use and control. Establishment of d7f section. Diagram Building using Logs Minor Codes and D/F. Full scale v/orking Group Attempt Private Study. Test Paper. -OFF, i-ltli Week.  The course is now turned into a working group. As practice continues it will 1 Practice task taking 2 Handle Logs 3 Handle Minor Codes 4 Make Activity Reports 5 Use and control D/F   6 Handle traffic of E if Grade C F if Grade 3 In addition each day a lecture will be given and a time set aside for study and questions or discussion.  Day 22. Review of previous week. Discussion of Test paper. Day 23. Some Captured Documents.  ti11 11   Day 24. Day 25. Study of British Field experience. Day 26. Presentation of Intelligence according to Grade  it11 it   Day 27.  5th Week.  From this point the Group continues. All trainees perform all parts of the routine in rotation. According to the Grade lectures will develop the Intelligence aspects under the following headings  The German Y Service all grades Supervision of Sets A B or C Recording of information A B or C Intelligence from W/T I. Diagrams A B or C Reports B and c Liaison and contacts B and C,  25133 Wt.23572/3634 100.000 7/43 A.&.E.W.Ltd. Gp.698  26508 Wt.48858/45'92 100 000 1/44 J.5286 ''l&l/Z/C-  NO MINUTES TO BE WRITTEN ON THIS JACKET BRANCH MEMORANDA B.M. COVER Unregistered  \ Reference Number of Subject. \ Originating Branch.  S' CUt lT'/ / uA  yM/i/s/G.a Jyfc/l f ' fit ft CM NOTES ON THE USE OF BRANCH MEMORANDA  See paragraphs 160165 Office Instructions 1943 1. The existei and movements of a B.M. unlike those of a registered file are NOT recorded by Registry. 2. B.Ms. may OJ LY be used as   a ENCLOSURE fe.Ms.For action on letters or other important Papers when the appro priate registered file is not available. When it is essentiy for a branch to obtain quickly the viwrs of a number of other branches and th Se branches are not likely to need to refeALo the file in order to formulate their yjews it is often appropriate to send  Encloslke B.Ms. simultaneously to each sucll branch. Enclosure B.Ms. or the substance ofrehem must be enclosed in the registered file at the first opportunity. INTERNAL DISCUSSIreN B.Ms.For  domestic  records or discussions within a direc  6 torate etc. or for o%er preliminary soundings on Any questions which may or may not at a later stage requfee a registered file.  c COVERS FOR UNIMPORTANT LETTERS ETC./ B.M. covers may be used when a jacket is essential for unfggistered correspondence unlikely to involve much inter branch discussion. 3. If a B.M.. has or acquires any general importance the branch concerned should link the B.M. to a registered file at the earliest possible momentum one of the following ways   a By sending the complete B.M. to be L and thus raised to the status of a registered file  5 By transferring the B.M. as an enclosuf%t . registered file 4. The branch originating a B.M. must be formed if the B.M. is registered or inserted in a registered file by another branch. Referred to Date Referred to Date Referred to Date / /   /  /, MOST SECRET  w Chairman 'Y' Committee D.D.S. Station X. Copy tot Mr. Cooper X. As you know we have been asked to supply to the American 'Y Service two copies of the Vvalrus Code and the associated one-time pads. One of these outfits is to be used in North Africa. I had intended to issue these without more ado until during my recent visit to North Africa I received disturbing reports about the security of the U.S. main 'Y' Station. There were also indications that the French had somehow got hold of forecasts oil German Army call-signs. I therefore feel that it is wise to impose some Restriction on the Americans as regards the use of Walrus in future. Will you please say if you agreeir-td 2. I hope to bring up this and the wider subject of American co-operation at the next Y' Meeting. Group Captain 7.2.43. D.D.I.4. 1 Enel. /  \, AUKA KRACS  Terms of Issue  1. All recipients of the Walrus Code and the associated cyphers are required to abide by the following conditions and they will be held responsible that the officers to whom they issue these documents equally comply with these terms. Reproduction  2. No part of the Walrus Code or associated cyphers  referred to collectively as Walrus may be copied or otherwise reproduced. Rules for employment  3. Holders are bound by any limitations on the employment of Walrus which may be laid dowr jr fhe 1Y' Parti° f1 r /Walrus the /may at the present time be made available to Allied  Y Services. All reasonable precautions will be taken to avoid capture. Any intention to use Walrus in close proximity to the enemy must first be agreed by D.D.I.4. Air Ministry  Security  4. The usual precautions applicableto all secret documents for custody and security during transit.will be applied to the Walrus. A quarterly muster will be held and on l/l 1/4 1/7 and 1/10 of each year a return will be rendered to B.D.I.4. stating the documents held their copy numbers and on whose charge they are., Wt.23572/3634 100 000 7/43 A.&E.W.Ltd. Gp.69  Wt.29970/3870 100 000 9/43 J.5287 . . NO MINUTES TO BE WRITTEN ON THIS JACKET BRANCH 'MEMORANDA B.M. COVER Unregistered  --- ---   if   \ Reference Number of Subject.  \ Originating Branch. JlTtV/P/ TV \ mlnzlq  /lt/t iff c i.   \ NOTES ON THE USE OF BRANCH MEMORANDA / M'  See paragraphs 160165 Office Instructions 1943 1. The existerife and movements of a B.M. unlike those of a registered fil j are NOT recorded by Registry. 2. B.Ms. may ON&f be used as   . ENCLOSURE TLMs.For action on letters or other important fiapers when the appro priate registeny file is not available. When it is essentiy for a branch to obtain quickly the views of a number of other branches and these branches are not likely to need to refer r o the file in order to formulate their views it is often appropriate to send  Encloses B.Ms. simultaneously to each such branch. Enclosure B.Ms. or the substance of rfeem must be enclosed in the registered file at the first opportunity.  . INTERNAL DISCUSSION B.Ms.'For domestic  records or discussions within a direc torate etc. or for otI%r prehminary soundings on-any questions which may or may not at a later stage requiS a registered file.  c COVERS FOR UNIMPORTANT LETTERS ETC.-B.M. covers may be used when a jacket is essential for unregistered correspondence unlikety to involve much inter branch discussion. % /  t MR 3. If a B.M. has or acquires any geheral importance the branch concerned should link the B.M. to a registered file at the earliest possiBjle moment' in one of the following ways  [. By sending the complete B.M. to be rlfeisterej and thus raised to the status of a registered fife X  . By transferring the B.M. as an enclosure 1 a registered file. 4. The branch originating a B.M. must be in%med if the B.M. is registered or inserted in a registered file by another branch. Referred to Date Referred to Date Referred to Date Mf / , TOPSEMET Y 's/c    Intelligence Division Naval Staff Admiralty  S.W.1  P.914 5th August 1945. Chairman sigint Board  I attach copies of C. in C. Med. s signal T.0.0. 312203/July and the Admiralty reply  T.0.0. 031225A/August. CM O  should he glad if the consideration f this matter hy the Board forecast in your  I   .  letter YB/113/G-.1 dated 27th July could he hastened.  Director of Naval Intelligence, T0PSE6RET   COPY IN  312230B July  Date 1.8.45 Reed. 0351 Prom G. in G. f led.   NAVAL CYPHER OTP BY W/T  Addressed Admiralty for D.N.I.  Repeated P.O.L.E.M.  GUARD  W/T activity report from Sidi Bishr Y has Been received with distribution in accordance with D.N.I. number 9/5987 of 25th June which includes a copy to OPNAV for 20 G. This report includes particulars of TRESS cover.  2. Request Admiralty decision whether traffic reports on Allied cover should be given distribution in accordance with D.N.I. instructions or whether this should be confined to traffic reports on enemy cover only. 3. Pending Admiralty decision V.A.M. and P.O.L.E.M. are requested to arrange that reports from Dingli and Sidi Bishr Y stations are only made in accordance with para 2 of Med. No. 00500/YF 35 of 24th May Admy. corrupt group number 201 17 . 312230B  D.S.D.9 2 D.N.1. 4 for action D.D. I. G. 3 CKfsiil, . JT795 Wt. 57236/P8012. 10 000 pads. 4/45. B. & S. Ltd.'51-9623. OUT MESSAGE OR POSTAG RAM .Delete as necessary OR WAR REGISTRY USE ONLY. No. of Addressees PASS TO   ADDRESS See Note Hi Date 3 & ' Indication of Priority  Delete as necessary FROM ADMIRALTY TO DEFERRED s 3 4 k  See Note i ROUTINE CT See Note ii Isss-  FOR WAR REGISTRY USE ONLY.  Delete as SECRET  TOP SECRET necessary CONFIDENTIAL If non-restricted RESTRICTED delete all attej in your iia been m&ar ootmiikwntiim Board Oeoision ia  .enueat yot will armnge fbr dietritmtioia of pepopto in accordanea witdi .u . .X a letter S/396 iat d puna pending dftelelon  Kxt. 826 T.O.O. 031225A/August j H' / /VA f ' /yvU AJ Notes  DEFERRED should be used whenever a delay in delivery of up to 36 hours is acceptable.  Priority IMPORTANT or above is seldom justified for other than operational messages. Where it is essential insert priority required in this space and asterisk against addressee s requiring the priority. If priority to all is essential state to all.  m Write BASEGRAM where appropriate alter any sea-going addressee. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION SEE OFFICE INSTRUCTIONS CHAP B., TOP SECKBT  Signals Journal raAi3/G i. Broadway Buildings Broadway- S.W.l.  27i h July 1945.  D.N.I. B.S.D. D.M.I. D.Sigs.  A O.A.S l D.Gr. of Signals Director J.C.& C.S.  Confirming telephone conversation of 27th July the Chairman s j'toorandum YB/113/G-.1. of 24th July is hereby cancelled  A paper is now being prepared on the subject matter contained therein for circulation and consideration at an ordinary meeting of the Board of which due notice will be given.  Wing Commander Secretary 3IGIOT BOARD, oma gigoCTHm.mmm  Otedr HuKhes raferred to the Adtatrulty narratives mda as tbs Soarborougb and i iowordown imports. He stated tlmt the Admiralty had always circulated their narrativ wry widely to all naval autlioritiss overseas and also to the Dominiona and the toericans. He was new/ wonder ing wiiether now that all sorts of transmissions were beginning to appear increasingly in these reports it was policy to oontinue to send the to  the Americans and to the Peraiiucsss. ise felt it was for the 31gint Board to give a riling.  -be Oitairinan stated he had spoken to Mr. da Grey who stated that the current policy was to oontinue full oooperation. lie thought tlie meeting should ieoord that feue matter hsd been bi ought up and draw the attention of tue Board to it   '  0mdr.l5ighe stated there did not appear to be equal cooperation equivalait onbottiaidMM fr yi r   loan Y staid.on and nor did G.G.C.3.    gho OdaBittee decided to put the matter to the Board drawing  their attention to Gmdr.Bhghes's statement above.,  1  TOP SECRET  Signals Journal Bi'cadv/cgr Buildings  XB/113/G.1  Broadway S.W.l  24th July 1945.  D W I.  D.S.D. D.M.I. D.Sigs. A.O.A.S. l D.Gt of Signals Director G.C. & C.S. Regarding the revised allocation of interception tasks at Servioe SY Stations in U.K. and the Mediterranean Im of the opinion that all current reports and narratives dealing with intercepted traffic should receive restricted distribution.  In nry view circulation of such doounjants should new be liiadied to selected British recipients only.  Would you please let mo have your ooisments and any suggestions on this subject., Attached is draft letter to the Directors whicu if you approve I will have 'Ormiged for your signature.  1 j/t t a 5ii7-o-l', DRAFT/  D.N.I. D.S.D. D.M.I. D.Sigs A.G.A S X D.G. of Signals Director G.G.& G.S. Regarding the revised allocation of interception  tasks at Service 'Y Stations in U.K. Europe and the  Mediterranean I am of the opinion that all current reports  and narratives dealing with intercepted traffic should  receive restricted distribution.  In my view circulation of such documents should  now be limited to selected British recipients only.  Would you please let me have your comments and  any suggestions on this subject.  Chairman SIGIHT BOARD., z / fActcst  Km It r st, SECRET. Signals Journal Broadway Buildings Broadway S.W.l.  23rd July 1945  To The Chainnan Signal Intelligence Board  Prom Secretary Signal Intelligence Board.  I would direct your attention to Minute 86 of the 13th Meeting of the 'Y' Committee held on 18.7 45 reading as follows   86. COOPERATION WITH AMERICMS.  Cmdr. Hughes said that the Admiralty were in the habit of giving wide circulation to their station narratives giving complete cover reports -i.e. to all Naval authorities overseas and also to the Dominions and Americans. He wondered whether the Sigint Board had recently considered the policy underlying this having regard to the fact that a station such as Scarborough covered no enemy traffic at all. In any event the Admiralty had never received any equivalent narrative from other countries. The Chairman said that he had made enquiries and was in a position to state that the current policy was to continue as at present.  At the request of the Committee the Chairman undertook that he would see that the attention of the Board was drawn to the current position with a view to getting a new ruling in the matter.  Although the distribution of numbered copies does not include any Dominion or American formations it would appear that the  Board have now to decide whether in view of the fact that other transmissions are beginning to appear in the reports our policy should be changed and that copies should be reserved for British recipients  only., , H PST SECRET.  INFORMATION FOR THE U.S.  A great difficulty has arisen as to what information may be passed to the i-imericans.  They have already been given verbally full information on our radio counter-measures and are now asking    a For written material on the same subject.  b To attend meetings of our Radio Counter-Measures Oonmittee. The principal objection to agreeing to these requests is that information obtained from M.S.S. is referred to in some of the only relevant series of reports which are serially numbered and therefore indicate the existence of others and also at the meetings  in question.  No indication of the origin of the information is of course mentioned in either case and it might perfectly well have been obtained from other sources such as prisoners of war.  The question is of great importance since a refusal of these apparently reasonable requests may lead to serious illfeeling.,  1  NO MINUTES TO BE WRITTEN ON THIS JACKET  BRANCH MEMORANDA B.M. COVER Unregistered  CLMfciTy /uVvvsyO r NOTES ON THE USE OF BRANCH MEMORANDA  See O.M. 1998 1 of 25/7/41. 1. The existence and movements of a B.M. unlike those of a registered file are NOT recorded by Registry. 2. B.Ms. may ONLY be used as   a ENCLOSURE B Ms.For action on letters or other important papers when the appro priate registered file is not available. When it is essential for a branch to obtain quickly the vietys of a number of other branches and these branches are not likely to need to refer To the file in order to formulate their views it is often appropriate to send  Enclosure B.Ms. simultaneously to each such branch. Enclosure B.Ms. or the substance of them must be enclosed in the registered file at the first opportunity.  b INTERNAL DISCUSSION B.Ms.For  domestic  records or discussions within a direc torate etc. or for other preliminary soundings on any questions which may or may not at a later stage require a registered file.  c COVERS FOR UNIMPORTANT LETTERS ETC.B.M. covers may be used when a jacket is essential for unregistered correspondence unlikely to involve much inter branch discussion. 3. If a B.M. has or acquires any general importance the branch concerned should link the B.M. to a registered file at the earliest possible moment in one of the following ways   a By sending the complete B.M. to be registered and thus raised to the status of a registered file  b By transferring the B.M. as an enclosure to a registered file. 4. The branch originating a B.M. must be informed if the B.M. is registered or inserted in a registered file by another branch. Referred to Date Referred to Date Referred to Date /  18060 Wt.17615/3231 100 000 7/41 A.& E.W.Ltd. Gp.698 J.5287,  -L. /'tA-'-f  i  - -  ijjlf  fif-r '7 sftr p r  in k J-rnK u/7v A. U d Ni --c-J J jaSZ Ha -Q v io W-vOk fti a c ' .v 1 'ki '---O  Vv ff%U dJ  4 Irf . M w. 6 i f v '  Sf Itx uc Ci in- e . 4f 3 c JX pr pr .t. IkA fk fif JS/ . 2j UJ-jT 'tiQJJUs rn rJo vi  &v  yvq C wX v rw  0 -4  sxw CXM /VSA ' s f ll ilx A-u -i.  Jj - A  .4p  rv  4t-   -tuv  'ITrJkjJ.J' XuA iM 7 '-P V  Jummsu i I O O/A Ar  n S.  / 'fl . I t A Z-'r yl -.  i/X 'i Nv'' xA V --o 'HU.. &o / ' 14 5  his is a copy. The original has been retained undsf section 3 4 of the Public Records AoiL -.1958, /j-i J '/ . / . JT ' /O / w - l- \/ i  %il 1 M m m - fl -. j  JX'U. i 1 J-J J.. 7 /rrr iaW  its a ri rv Tv eA- i f4 ' C rc ff/  rij j.  a rr P \ nAAi -A f/ /- 1 4 ' aa Oaa ' M m This is a copy. The original has been retained under section 3 4 of the Public Records Act -JQSisU, COPY C/552. LONDON  28th August 1942.  Dear  I attach herewith a Memorandum for discussion by the Vice-Chiefs of Staff at their convenience.  Each DirectoT of Intelligence is passing a copy to his respective Vice-Chief.  Brigadier L.C.Hollis C.B.E. R.M.  Line 12. of Memorandum.  The words 'the persona information of the Britisl were added at the suggestion of the D.M.I., MOST SECRET.   COPY.  MEMORANDUM.  The Y Board has been reviewing the passage of Special Intelligence to the Chiefs of Staff in U.S.A. as well as to their American colleagues. Although reports based on this material are at present sent to Admiral Cunningham and to the Air Ministry Representative at Washington it is felt that a more unified system is now desirable and that the three Chiefs of Staff in U.S.A. should be regularly informed of the general trand of events as derived from this source.  It is q uite clear that the Admiralty must signal operational information independently to Admiral Cunningham but it is suggested that the Directors of Intelligence should individually provide for the personal information of the British Chiefs of Staff in U.S.A. a weekly digest on their respective subject or more often if the situation demands which they would be at liberty to pass orally to their American colleagues General Marshall General Strong and Admiral King emphasising each time the origin of the information in order to prevent further dissemination.  As an added check on the security of the source all telegrams containing Special Intelligence will be passed over C's route and in his cypher and in future all messages other than Admiralty operational signals will be available for his scrutiny in accordance with his responsibility to the Minister of Defence.  Now that Admirals Stark and Kirk have full access to Special Intelligence in England and General Eisenhower is aware of its existence it is submitted that General Eisenhower s Chief of Staff and G.2 Brigadier Mockler- Ferryman should also be given Special Intelligence affecting their sphere of interest.  General Eisenhower has been made aware of the special instructions which govern its handling by British recipients and arrangements are being completed for the transmission of Special Intelligence to G.H.Q. and Army H.Q. in Operation Torch tinder the same safeguards as are in force in the Middle East.  28th August. 1942,  6/'13  MOST SECRET.  'MEMORANDUM FOR CHIEFS OF STAFF.  The Y Board has been reviewing the passage of special intelligence to the Chiefs of Staff in U.S.A. as well as to their American colleagues. Although reports based on this material are at present sent to Admiral Cunning ham and to the Mr Ministry Representative in Washington It is felt that a more unified system is now desirable and that the three Chiefs of Staff in U S.A should be regularly in formed of the general trend of events as derived from this  source.  It is quite clear that the Admiralty must signal operational information independently to Admiral Cunningham but it is suggested that the Directors of Intelligence should  individually provide for the Chiefs of Staff in U.S.A. a weekly digest on their respective subject or more often if  the situation demands which they would be at liberty to pass orally to their American colleagues. General Marshall  General Strong and Admiral King.  Now that Admirals Stark and-Kirk have full access  to Special Intelligence in England and General Eisenhower  is aware of its existence it is submitted that General  Eisenhower's Chief of Staff and. G.2 Brigadier Mockler-   Ferryman should also be given Special Intelligence affecting  their sphere of interest.  General Elsenhower has been made .aware of the  special instructions which govern its handling by British  recipients, MOST SECRET.  0/393  LONDON.  13th August 1942  Sear Admiral J.H.Godfrey Ma or General. P.H.N.Davidson Air Vice Marshal C.E.H.Medhurst Brigadier A.L.Harris Brigadier K.W.D.Strong CoimBarder E.W.H.Travis  Attached are i Letter from Chanr-nan Y Board re charter for the Director ComMoed Bta'cau Middle East.  ix Minutes of meeting of Y Board held on 12/Angust/19 -2.  iii Draft Memorandum to Chiefs of Staff from Chairman j 'V Board. I am directed to request that your oommants on iii above are returned at your very earliest convenience.  I am directed further to request that your comments on i above are forwarded in due course.  Secretary 'Y1 Board.  Copy to Chairman 'Y Board., MOST SECRET. l MORMDIM FOR CHIEFS OF STAFF.  The 'Y4 Board has been reviewing the passage of special intelligence to the Chiefs of Staff in U.S.A. as 'sell as to their Americatt colleagues. Althougii reports based on this material are at present sent to Admiral Cunning™ ham and to tixe Air Ministry Representative in W&shiiigton it is felt that a more unified system is new desirable and that the three Chiefs of Staff in U.S.A. should be regularly in formed of the general trend of events as derived from this source. It is quite clear that the Admiralty must signal operational information independently to Admiral Cunningham but it is suggested that the Directors of Intelligence should provide for the Chiefs of Staff in B.S.A. a weekly digest or  A more often if the situation demands which they would fee at liberty to pass orally to their American colleagues. General Marshall General Strong and Admiral King. Attached is a sample report which would be sent Sf /// s / J to U.S.A. fey special. C5 cipher. New that Admirals Stark and Kirk have full access to Special Intelligence in Englands and General EisenhSuer is aware of its existence it is submitted that General Eisen. -'J. l'-v j Sauer9s Chief of Staff and G.2. should also fee given Special Intelligence affecting their sphere of interest. CTVr  - General Eisenhauer has been made aware of the spec ial instructions which govern its handling fey British recipients. 13th August 1942., 1 \ MOST SECRET A1-' '   /  From -Rear A 3miral J.H. Godfrey  j&'l  D. H. I. /' To -Chairman 'Y' Board.  Copy to -Major-General F.H.N. Davidson Air Vice-Marshal C.E.H. Medhurst Commander Travis.  Date -11th August 1942.  P. 343. It is proposed that a meeting of the  Y Board be held at an early date to discuss the  question of passing Special Intelligence to the American Authorities -some notes are attached., MOST SECRET  SPECIAL INTELLIGENCE AND THE AMERIOAHS   1 Transmission of Special Intelligence to the Senior British Officers in America. The position as I see it is as follows  a Admiralty passes a daily signal to Admiral Cunningham which contains a digest of items of the Special Intelligence to which I have access.  b It is understood that the Air Ministry send a weekly telegram to the Air Marshal which contains some Special Intelligence.  c The War Office pass to the Field Marshal Technical Information and Long Term reports extracted from Special Intelligence.  2 Transmission of Special Intelligence to the American Authorities.   a The C.N.O. Washington receives from me any items of Special Intelligence which may affect the American Naval Forces in areas outside our Home Waters.  b The American Admiral operating with the Home Fleet receives certain Ultra Messages.  c Admiral Stark receives a daily bulletin from me of what I think is necessary for him to know. I am not aware whether the other Ministries pass Special Intelligence to the Americans.  GENERAL   i In order that the Senior British Officers in U.S. should be able to discuss items of intelligence with the appropriate U.S. Officers it is necessary that some directions  should be issued to authorise this procedure.   ii It will soon become evident to the Americans that we are in possession of Special Intelligence which has not been passed to them in the orthodox way.   iii It is becoming increasingly important that the Americans should be aware of all major items of Special Intelligence in order to prevent them from drawing incorrect conclusions, [MOST SEC  Brigadier A.L. Harris Chairman Y Canmittee.  Reference discussion at this morning's Y Committee meeting attached are Appendix l a copy of C.N.O. Washington's security arrangements concerning Special Intelligence and  Appendix II DdWt '.'s criticisms of these arrangements which were signalled to Captain Hastings.  As you will see they are mainly naval although the general considerations apply to all types of Special Intelligence.  D.N.I. does not wish these passed round the Y Committee. 29th July 1942, --'--   MOST SECRET   APPENDIX I  SECRET  Qp-20-G/ir   SC A6-2/A8 Serial 32 20  From The Ccaanandor-in-Chief United States Fleet and Chief of Naval Operations. To The Commander-in-chief United States Atlantic Fleet The Commander-in-Chief United States Pacific Fleet. The Commander Southwest Pacific Force. Subject Control of dissemination and use of radio intelligence 1. The extreme importance of of exagr information has been repeatedly demonstrated. From no other form of intelligence can the enemy's intentions he so postively determined.  2. In view of these facts it precaution be taken with regard to controlling the dissemination and use of radio intelligence in order to avoid drying up its sources. Any disclosures in the past with regard to the source of radio intelligence have invariably resulted in an immediate change in the emqy's communications and the consequent loss of weeks or months of painstaking effort on the part of our radio intelligence personnel. It is recognised of course that radio intelligence is of no value unless proper operational use can be made of it. However momentary tactical advantage is seldom worth the risk of compromising the source for such compromise will stop the flow of information and thereby vitally affect operations on all fronts and in all areas. 3. In order to further the maintenance radio intelligence the following regulations for the dissemination and use of this intelligence are hereby prescribed  a The utmost secrecy shall be used in dealing with decryption intelligence i.e. information resulting from the reading of enemy encrypted despatches.  b Radio intelligence should be passed on to subordinate commanders only in the form of operational directives whenever practicable.  c When such intelligence must be given out to lower commanders as information it should be passed without any reference to its secret source and should contain somewhere near the beginning of the message the word ULTRA. or the word ZEAL . V --J  d Special care must be taken in every command to insure that radio intelligence is provided with special security safeguards and is seen and handled by the absolute minimum number of persons required for its use. Cryptographic systems of the highest available security and the narrowest distribution which includes the originator and addressees shall always be used for trans mitting radio intelligence.  e Every effort must be made to avoid indicating any connection between the source of intelligence and the outsome of operations. When action is based on radio intelligence local commanders will insure that the action cannot be traced to this source of intelligence alone. All copies of radio intelligence messages should be destroyed by burning as soon as possible after being read. Ships at sea where eneny action is possible should take particular precautions to destroy all evidences of intelligences sources in order that there may be no possibility of their falling into enemy hands. Copy toL The Director of Naval Intelligence The Director of Naval Communications The Commander South Pacific Force., APPENDIX II   MOST SECRET  Following for Capt Hastings Personal from D.N.I. Personal  No.702.  Tour memorandum of 22nd June enclosing serial 0325520 from 0. in C  U.S. Fleet and C.N.O. and your letter of 30th June concerning Midway Press articles. I Consider that while the U.S. orders concerning the handling of Special Intelligence represent progress in right direction they urgently need further tightening up in the following respects.   1 When passing on Special Intelligence to auttorities not normally entitled to receive it this must repeat must be done in the form of operational orders.  2 The cyphers used must be specially authorised for this purpose and distribution of the cypher keys or machine settings roust be restricted to the appropriate authorities.  3 It must be laid down that only certain officers in each command or ship are to decypher and have knowledge of contents of Special Intelligence. The names of these officers to be recorded.  4 The Special prefixes such as Jtymatic or Ultra are only to be used in messages passed to authorities who receive.-Special Intelligence so that they can identify the source. These prefixes must not be used to lower commands vide c of  U.S. Memo .  5 Important to emphasise that there should be no reference to Special Intelligence in War Diaries Reports of proceedings etc. Conclusion  Request you will show this telegram to Admiral Cunningham and make every endeavour to get U.S. authorities to conform to the above which have been adopted in this country as a result of much experience. It is also urged that arrangements be made with Press whereby all repeat all matter produced by press men accredited to Fleet is submitted to censorship before publication.  1840/7. 7. 42., .t  14010 Wt.50803/136 50 000 3/40 A.& E.W.Ltd. Gp.698 J.4043, MOST SECRET.  SJB/2I9 Signals Journal Broadway Buildings COPY NO. .4. Broadway S.W.I. 16th February 1943 Brigadier Sir Stevrart G.Menries Commodore E.G.W.Rushbrooke Major General F.H.K.Davidson  Air Vice Marshal F.F.Inglis  sd'Brigadier i.L.Harris Brigadier K.VhD.Strong Commander E.W.H.Travis  Attached is copy of telegram  received from Brigadier Mocker-Ferryman in reply  to D.M.I's telegram A rL/PK ll8 dated 6/2/43 eir   culated tinder cover SJB/215 of 8th February  Secretary Y Board, ,  /HO  JOs D M l FROM DUTY OFFICER HUT 3 FOLLOWING RECEIVED FROM ALGIERS WITH T 0 0.13002/8/2 K I  CGAD/PK 14 PERSONAL FOR DM FROM MOCKLER-FERRYMAN REFERENCE TELEGRAM AWL PK 118 DATED FEB . 5  1. KNOWLEDGE OF SUCCESS IN ULTRA CONFINED AT PRESENT CERTAINLY CAPT DONEY PROBABLY COL HAYES BOTH AT THIS HEADQUARTERS. FEEL/ CONFIDENT KNOWLEDGE NOT DIVULGED DOWN TO Rl PLATOONS OR TO 128 RI COY ACTING AS IF B-TYPE SECTION IMAGINE 122 Rl COY ASSIGNED THIS HEADQUARTERSAND AT PRESENT COVERING HIGH GRADE LINKS AS  TRAINING WILL NOT LONG REMAIN COMPLETELY IGNORANT OF VALUE OF TRAFFIC TAKEN. IMPOSSIBLE SUBSTITUTE LOW GRADE TASKS FOR HIGH GRADE AS WAS SUGGESTED SINCELOW GRADE INAUDIBLE HERE AND SIS NOT WILLING MOVE COMPANY AWAY FROM AFMQ. CANNOT DETERMINE WHAT EXTENT KNOWLEDGE POSSESSED BY W/T fit PERSONNEL BEING TRAINED UNDER BICHER AND MEADE IN UK AND DUE ARRIVE HERE SHORTLY. 2. YOUR ANSWERSTO QUESTIONS CD TO CD MOST HELPFUL. SO FAR ELEPHANT AND BIRD BOOKS ISSUED TO A-TYPE SECTION AT ARMY LEVEL  I ONLY WOULD APPRECIATE 2 COMPLETE COPIES ELEPHANT BOOK FOR jm jT ISSUE TO BTYPE SECTIONS ORDERS AS TO DESTRUCTION LL BE EMPHASISED AGAIN THOUGH DISPOSITIONS ALREADY TAKEN. m/ BB/WO C23 HYD/R 2122/8/2/43. RD BB MW  CTN AT END OF LINE 3 READ CZ23 Yf C//3 SORRI NOT C AS SENT. ALSO LINE 4 GR 5 SHOULD READ DM 1 NOT DM AS SENT WORD MB, Copy s i.luCT BiiCRBi  Cisnals Journal BTOatety 33uildinss 1   rf Io  Br.O.'ii . Jf ' 8th Febroary 1943 Brlsadler Sir Stewart G llensies Ooraraodore i5.G.K Kusliorooke ila or General F.Il n I aviclaonB air 'Vice Llarshal F F Inslis / [ V Bricacier A L Harris - Brig&dier K w.D.strong Ccoseader B J IX Travis Herewith copy of telesrari dcapatchod to Brigadier Hocklci Fcrryrum in reply to tlmt frets Lieut Colonel Forrer reference OSLU/PK 46 of 18/1  \c. Hiug . i5 arsaKS r Secretary Y Board, PERSOITAL SDR MOGKLER-PHRSm FROM DJI.I. ZZ  RSFI'2RiWCS TELEQ-RAM FROM FORRSR TO LYCETT HO. OLSU/PK  hS iQ/i FIRST. Y BOARD WISH TO KHOW MORE DEFINITELY TO WHAT EXTENT KHOVTiEDGE OF OUR SUCCESS IH ULTRA IS POSSESSED BY OFFICERS AHD O.R S OF U.S. 'Y' UNITS. IS THIS KNOWLEDGE OOBFUED TO SELECTED OFFICjsES OF YOUR IMMEDIATE STAFF f\HD  R.I. COMPANIES ONLY OR IS IT KNOWN AS FAR DOW AS R.I.PLATOONS SECOND. QUESTION OF RELATIONS BETWEEN BRITISH AND iULJRIGW  YS NOW UNDER DISCUSSION BY Y BOARD. R1DSULTS MILL BE COIIMUNIGATED IN DUE COURSE. THIRD. ANSWER TO QUESTIONS AS FOLLOWS 1 C-IN-C NORTH AFRICA IS TREAT13D IN THE SAME WAY AS BRITISH FORCE COMMANDER AS REGARDS IirfBLLIGENCE. THEREFORE SUCH INTERCEPTION TASKS AS REQUIRED BY B.P TO HELP THE GENERAL EFFORT MAY BE REQUESTED WHEI1 YOU ARE IN POSITION TO ffijJLP. CONSIDER INTERCEPTION TASKS REQUIRED BY THE COfflANDER SHOULD BE CONTROLLED BY A.C. OF S. G.2 AND EXERCISED BY SIGS. 1.  2 AGREED SIMILAR ORDERS FOR DISTRIBUTION AND DESTRUCTION AS IN MIDDLE EAST SHOULD BE ADOPTED.  A ELEPHANT BOOK DOWN TO SB TYPE SECTIONS WITH TOP PRIORITY DESTRUCTION BY BURNING.  B READABLE LOW GRADE CODES ETC. DOWN TO B TYPE SECTIONS WITH HIGH PRIORITY DESTRUCTION BY BURNING.  C CAPTURED DOCUMTS APPIffiClATIONS FUNKPLAN W/T I SUMILffilSS DOM TO B' TYPE SECTIONS FOR PBRUSAL AND IMMilDIATE REPEAT l l 3DIATS RETURN.  D BIRD BOOK DISTRIBUTED FIXED STATIONS ONLY.   E IN CONNECTION WITH ABOVE INSTRUCTIONS SHOULD ALSO BE I88U i ID TOR OLD LOGS AND TRAFFIC TO BE  /RETAINED, RETAINED ONLY FOR A EE / DAYS AND THM DESTROYED.   3 AGREE  43 THIS IS BOUND UP WITH OSaiSR/ii PROBLEM NOW UNDER DISCUSSION BY BOARD  T.O.O. 1051/6/2/432., GK BB HERE TKS BB/  TO -BR1QADIER HARRIS VIA Q/CAPT. WINTERBOTHAM FROM -W/CDR. JONES. HUT 3.  REFERENCE YOUR MESSAQE TELEPR1NTED AT 1653/6/2/43Z  CHEF. OLSU/PK 46 THIS .WAS PASSED VERBATIM AS AWL/PK 118 PERSONAL FOR MOCKLER-FERRYMAN FROM ZZ WITH T.O.O. 18SV6/2/43Z.  BB/  EMJ/LS 1936/6/2/43Z RDBB THKS, 4' j TO W/CDR. JONES. FROM BRIQADIER HARRIS VIA Q/ APT. WINTERBOTHAM. PLEASE DESPATCH FOLLOW INQ TO MAPPLEBECK AT ALGIERS. MOZf ft\rn \PK IIB. 6/2 PERSONAL FOR MOCKLER-FERRYMAN FROM D.M.I. 2LZ. REFERENCE TELEQRAM FROM FORRER TOLYCETT NO. OLSU/PK 46 18/1. FIRST. -Y BOARD WISH TO KNOW MORE DEFINITELY TO WHAT EXTENT KNOWLEDQE OF OUR SUCCESS IN ULTRA IS POSSESSED BY OFFICERS AND O.R.'S OF U.S. 'Y1 UNITS. IS THIS KNOWLEDGE CONFINED TO SELECTED OFFICERS OF YOUR IMMEDIATE STAFF AND R.I. COMPANIES ONLY OR IS IT KNOWN AS 0 FAR DOWN AS R.I. PLATOONS SECOND.  -QUESTION OF RELATIONS BETWEEN BRITISH AND AMERICAN 1Y NOW UNDER DISCUSSION BY 'Y' BOARD. RESULTS WILL BE COMMUNICATED IN DUE COURSE. THIRD.  ANSWER to QUESTIONS AS FOLLOWS - CD C-IN-C NORTH AFRICA IS TREATED IN THE SAME WAY i AS BRITISH FORCE COMMANDER AS REGARDS INTELLIGENCE. THEREFORE SUCH INTERCEPTION TASKS AS REQUIRED BY B.P. TO HELP THE GENERAL EFFORT MAY BE REQUESTED WHEN YOU ARE IN POSITION TO HELP. CONSIDER INTERCEPTION TASKS REQUIRED BY THE COMMANDER SHOULD BE CONTROLLED BY A.C. OF S. G.2 AND EXERCISED BY SIQS. 1. END OF PAGE ONE, PAGE TWO  AQREED SIMILAR ORDERS FOR DISTRIBUTION AND  DESTRUCTION AS IN MIDOLE EAST SHOULD BE ADOPTED. CA ELEPHANT BOOK DOWN TO B' TYPE SECTIONS WITH  TOP PRIORITY DESTRUCTION BY BURNINQ. CB READABLE LOW QRADE CODES ETC. DOWN TO 'B1 TYPE SECTIONS WITH HIGH PRIORITY DESTRUCTION BY BURNING.  CO CAPTURED DOCUMENTS APPRECIATIONS FUNKPLAN W/T I SUMMARIES DOWN TO 'B' TYPE SECTIONS FOR PERUSAL AND IMMEDIATE CREPEAT IMMEDIATE RETURN.  CD BIRD BOOK DISTRIBUTED FIXED STATIONS ONLY. CE IN CONNECTION WITH ABOVE INSTRUCTIONS SHOULD ALSO BE ISSUED FOR OLD LOGS AND TRAFFIC TO BE RETAINED ONLY FOR A FEW DAYS AND THEN DESTROYED. C3  C3 agree. C4 C4 C4 THIS IS BOUND UP WITH GENERAL PROBLEM NOW UNDER DISCUSSION BY BOARD.  DISTRIBUTION  C.S.S D.N.I. ADMIRALTY D.M.I. WAR OFFICE A. C.A.S. Cl AIR MINISTRY. B. G.S. Cl G.H.fcQ. HOME FORCES D.D.CS G.C. AND C.S. CHAIRMAN Y COMMITTEE C2 COPIES /TP TO HUT 3 AT 1659Z/6/2/43 BB NG  /  RD WS 16 92/6/2/43 QEP THKS,  /Y/ 7 4. /xwyj 0 s / crctC V'  o .  /i /S /-y  4 / T w, Pistribution  C. S.S. D. N.I.Admiralty P.M.I. War Office. A. C.A.S. l Air Ministry B. G.S. l G.H.Q.Home Forces P.P. S G.C. & C.S. Chairman Y Committee copies r'Mf' / 6.Feb.lQ4 ., Jl . MOST SECRET CIPHER TELEGRAM.  TO fee-rty-i r Sjed.-r' M J A fha - lv p tl. fotUu Cn sfc nnPPL &&t arMftVx  nfa &ryy fe .a.v-y jt j q t fyf CJlU Ct r Moc.kllr-f'erryma.n rOvvx 3 .lMX PERSONAL A r . gg Hi fh Reference telegram from FORRER to LYCETT No.OSLU/PK 46 l8/l.  First. Y Board wish to know more definitely to what extent knowledge of our success In ULTRA is possessed by Officers and O.R. s of U.S. Y Units. Is this knowledge confined to selected officers of your immediate staff and R.I. Companies only or is it known as far down as R.I. Platoons Second. Question of relations between British and American   Y now under discussion by Y Board. Results will be communicated in due course. Third. Answer to questions as follows  1 C-in-C North Africa is treated in the same way as British Force Commander as regards intelligence. Therefore such interception tasks as required by B .P. to help the general effort may be requested when you are in position to help. Consider interception tasks required by the Commander should be controlled by A.C. of S . G.2 and exercised by Slgs.1.   2 Agreed similar orders for distribution and destruction as in Middle East should be adopted.  a Elephant book down to B Type Sections with top priority destruction by burning. ioW G-Rfi&K  b Readable codes etc. down to B Type Sections with high priority destruction by burning.  c Captured documents appreciations funkplan W/T I summaries down to B Type Sections for perusal and immediate repeat immediate return.  d Bird book distributed fixed stations only.  e In connection with above instructions should also be issued for old logs and traffic to be retained only for a few days and then destroyed. yy J/sf&v . X  3  4 Agree. This is bound up with general problem now under discussion by Board.,  3  Brigadier G.S. Vale'  D.D.M.I. 0 .  The War Office  LONDON S.W.1.  3rd February 1943 MOST SECRET  The Chairman of the 'Y' Board  /  // With reference to your 0/2148 dated 29.1 43 I concur in general with the despatch of the proposed telegram to Mockler-Ferryman.  I suggest however that the paragraph third 2 is somewhat vague and may not be understood and should be re-v/ritten as follows  Agreed similar orders for distribution and destruction as in Middle Ehst should be adopted.   a Elephant book down to 'B' Type Sections with top priority destruction by burning. Readable codes etc. down to 'B Type Sections with high priority destruction by burning.   c Captured documents appreciations funk plan W/T I summaries down to B1 Type Sections for perusal and immediate repeat immediate return. X d Bird book distributed fixed stations only.   e In connection with above instructions should also be issued for old logs and traffic to be retained only for a few days and then destroyed. You may consider however that e above is purely a security matter and should not be included in this cable. If you decide on this I have no objection.  D.D.M.I. 0 ., -GSV  '-  ftCft 6 tyh3, tTTHQgf ttCTJM /  V f MOST SECRET IS/31/780 Chs.i rmaa  Y BqA'd 31 Jan 43 1 Reference yodir c/2.l4g with snclosnres I am j.n general fegTeeifierat with the terms of the dfaft telegram to A.C. of S G 2. A FJE Q.  2 There is a minor erroi-ih line 18 of the main temfc where Siga 1 one should read Sigs I Tnt This was wrongly ciphered in the original tolegreja from A FJi Q.  8 T e have already j.n Home Forces found ourselves in aJi equally embarrassing situation vis- .-vis the Americans Field 2Y3 Service and I feel that in the event of an allied H Q taking the Field in the V oSt we should be'faded under .emisbiag conditions with a state of affairs where either full co-operation would bs impossible or special security would cease to have any real meaning at all.  4 I consider that it is most important that vre should discuss and establish a policy or the whole subject at the earliest possible moment  Gr.S . Jnt G n Q Home Forces  Copy to Commodore B G N Rushbrooke Major General F JI H J avidsgn Air ioe -Marshal F F inglis  Brigadier A L Harris Commander E W Tra.vis., MOST SECRET    WHITEHALL 9000. EXTENS ION -7 4-3 .  P. 52. INTELLIGENCE DIVISION NAVAL STAFF ADMIRALTY S.W. 1. 1st PelDruary 1943.  Chairman 'Y' Board .  / With reference to your No. C/2148 dated 29th January I am in full agreement with the proposed interim telegram to Mockler-Ferryman.  2. My only comment is that in paragraph 1 of the draft telegram I suggest that the word  ultra is used in its wrong sense and that it should he replaced hy E traffic . NID/9., e-i  4   V MOST SECRET. C/2143. CjoP'J NO-5 LONDON. 29th January 1943 CoisiBOflora B.G.N.HiisiiDroolc Major General F.H.N.Davidsonn Mr Vice Msrslxgl P F.XngLis  %/Brlaaflier A.L .Harris BriSadler K.W. Strong / Comxaander E .W .H .Travis   Reference attached Memorandum - M.1.8/A.2025 and telegram in view of the delicacy of the problem of liaison with the Americans 1 thought it best that this master should he dealt with by the Board and not the Y5 Committee. X suggest therefore that the attached telegram fee despatched to Moohler-Ferryman as an interim measure. With regard to the general question of liaison with the Americans I have instructed to produce a Meiaorandm shoeing the present arrangements and any suggestions that he may have for future cooperation as a result of Colonel Tiltman s visit to U.S.A. I will circulate this in due course. rj-Briga.  CHAliSt N Y BOARD., I .   DRAFT. To FREEDOM MOST SECRCT. From WAR OFFICE. PERSONAL for A G. of S S.2 from D.M.T ReferencetelegramfromFORRER toLYCETTNo OSLO/PF 46 18/1  First. Y Board wish to know more definitely to what extent knowledge of our success In ULTRA is possessed by Officers and 0.R.'s of U.S. X5 Units. Is this knowledge confined to selected officers of your immediate staff and  R.I. Companies only or is it known as far down as R.X. Platoons Second. Question of relations hetween British and American  Y now under discussion by Y Board. Results will he communicated in due course.  Third. Answer to questions as follows    1 C-in-C. Horth Africa is tx eated in the same way as British Force Commander as regards in telligence. Therefore such Interception tasks as required by R.F. to help the general effort may he requested when you are in position to   help. Consider interception tasks required by the Commander should he controlled by A.C. of . 6 2 and exercised by Bigs.l.   2 Agree under same conditions as in force In the Middle East. . .  3 Agree.  4 This is bound up vdth general problem now under discussion by Board. Note. Presumably these conditions are known by A.G of 8. C.2., COPY/ THE WAR OFFICE LOHDOU SJLI. . 20tlu January 1943 M.I.8./A.gQ25 MOST SECRET. MemoranS-ua for -  All Members of the HY Committee.  1. We attach hereto a copy of a Secret Ciphertelegram received from A.F H.Q. This telegram is in reply to our Proc/PK/159 a copy of which is also attached. 2. This letter telegram is in reply to Colonel Forrer s telegram forwarded under our M..1 8./A.2025 of the 11th January 1945 an& discussed at the last meeting of -the ftYn Committee held on the 13th January 1943 3. We would like the points raised in this latest telegram from Colonel Forrer discussed at the next meeting of the Y Committee.  Signed 0.V.L. LYCETT. Colonel C.S . Distribution Brigadier A.1. Harris   -Captain J R S .Haines Coinmander C Lbehnis  Colone1 R G.Sarabier-ParryColonel G. .L.LycettLieut.Colonel S.H.S.Balmain Lieut.Colonel B E Waliasa Group Gaptain C S.Cadell Coiiffiander E.W H.Travis H C.MairAe. Esq., 'i  COPY MOST SECRET TELEGRAM.  Frora Freedom Algiers. T.0.0. I1452/I8/I/43.  Personal for Lycett From Ferrer. GSLU/PK.46. Further reference your personal message PHOC/PK 159 last paz a Position as to American Y Units much more complex in view of Information supplied by your branch to trai ring section at Etouea in consequence of which Hayes and honey expect 1 s personnel with units to handle Bird and Elephant Boohs which are not held  by our B Type Sections as well as considering forwarding Edward for processing to Bicher and. Washington on direct Signals Links without passing through me. Am amazed at detailed information highly secret nature imparted by Lithgow to Doney now in this theatre making it difficult for me to exercise any restraint on eventual tasks which they may consider fruitful. Have also heard that Bicher has. photostat copies his own make of above books but cannot naturally confirm. Have succeeded for the present in  stopping requests direct to Bicher for despatch pi copies thereof. Suggest that viiole position of relation between American and British Y needs clarification and definition as Betti has so far  been only half grasped and many ends left loose. Would appreciate a directive from RYt Board covering following.points.  1. Direction of all intercept tasks in this theatre vested in A.G. of S. G.2. and exercised by Slgs.l. 2. digs one responsible for issue of all technical l documents and the level of their distribution. 1  3.  Slge. one responsible for cipher sectirity of raw material sent to U.K. 4. ITo raw material to be forwarded Washington direct. Unless this -is done before arrival of units trouble may ensue. My own directive from Mockler-Ferryman quite clear and enforceable as far as internal this theatre ouc ncuoh addlvlonal weight would accnas from formal pronouncement based on security  grounds from YBoard covering external rela ionn., Vb  COPY/  proo/PK/159 MOST SECRET CIPHER TELEGRAM.  t  Frenu WAR OFFICE To FREEDOM.  'wLeUx. t-oa  STHBTLY LIAISON WITH FRENCH YOKE UNp .  SHOULD BE DEALT WITH CAUTIOUSLY' AS ALTHOUGH OFFICERS  \i f/Uvct M& MEN OF UNIT MAY.BE GOOD ALLIES.WE ARE UNAWARE-OF  ATTITUDE OF HIGHER AUTHORITIES TO WHOM RESULTS MAY BS  REPORTED AND PROGRAMME DIVULGED. YOU SHOULD COM'XEE YOURSCSLF TO OBTAINING THEIR COOPERATION OH R/T AND MP AIR TO GROUND SAFETY SERVICE. OTHER MATTERS BEST  LEFT L6NS SECONDLY INFORMATION MAY BS EXCHANGED WITH   y  UNITED STATES YdKE UNITS ON SAME LEVEL AS WE IMPART 6 TO OUR BAKER TYPE SECTION.  1513/1/43S  I, MOST SECRET  CHAIRMAN Y BOARD. Reference the attached memo from M.I.8 I explained to the 'Y meeting that as this problem involved the general question of Y liaison with the Americans the whole matter was being dealt with on the Y Board level. I discussed the whole problem with Travis on Tuesday and we thought perhaps the best way to tackle this matter was to send an interim reply to Mockler- Ferryman and Travis would produce a memorandum on the present and future liaison with the U.S.A. as a result of Tiltman's visit. A covering letter to the Board and draft interim telegram are attached for your approval. Iv Chairman Y Committee 28th January 1943, Draft telegram to Mockler-Ferryman.  Q LU jP 4Cs I I r-v-1  ICA  l Please state more definitely tofehat extent knowledge of our success in - is possessed by Officers and O.R. s of U.S. 'Y' Units. Is this knowledge confined to selected officers of your immediate staff and R.I. Companies only or is it known as far down as R.I. Platoons 2 Question of relations between British and American 'Y1 now under discussion by 'Y1 Board. Results will be communicated to-proper.authorities in due course. 3 Answer to your questions d C-in-C. North Africa is treated in the same way as British Force Commander as regards intelligence.Therefore such interception tasks as required by B.P. to help the general effort may be requested when you are in position to help. Other interception tasks required by the Commander should be controlled by A.C. of S. G-.2 and exercised by Sigs.l. Agreed under same conditions as in force in the Middle East. b Agree. This is bound up with general problem now under discussion by Board.  /L   I   uA i 0 L, DRAFT telegram to A.C. of 3. G.2 frm D.M.I  1 lease estate more definitely to atoat extent knowledge of/'E is knewi by Offioors and O.K a of Y Uoita. Is this   x .oonf a -MM -MTM 4r  and ft.I. Companies only or is eulrjpot t aweialdy known as far  downas ft.I.Viatoons 2 Question of relations between British and American 'Y' now under discussion by Y Board. Results will be ccxaraunicated  to proper authorities in due course.  3 Answer to your questions  a C-in-C North Africa is treated in the same way as British  W w4wAi-C . f k-V Force Coimaander. 'aMah-ijnpl ijj1 fhrrt such interception tasks as required by B.P. to help the general effort wifrl be  requested when you are in position to help. Other interception tasks required by the CeHanander should be controlled by A.C. of S. G.2. and exercised by Sigs.l.  A  b Agreed under same conditions mA in force in the Middle East  'U. i c Agree  d This is bound up with general problem now under discussion  by Board., Tel. No  THE WAR 'OFFICE  An further communication on this subject should be addressed to   LONDON S.W. 1 .   The Undersecretary of State The War Office  %3   as opposite and' the following number quoted.  M 1.8./A.2168 24th January 1943  Your Reference.rr. MOST SECRET  Memorandum for -   Chairman  Y Oommittee.  Y -  '  1. We spoke Brigadier Harris - Lieut.Col.Vernham 24/1/43 . .2. Attached hereto are copies of -   Paper on General Duties of  Sigs.I.G-2 at A.F.H.Q.  Paper on relations between Sigs.I.G-2 and G .3.0.A.F.H.Q-.  JRV/WH,  COPY MOST SECRET  B.389.798 ALLIED FORCE HEADQUARTERS G-2 Section. The general duties of Signal Intelligence G-2 Section at Allied Force Headquarters are  1. Co-ordination and control of all military Y resources in the Allied Force including Wireless Intelligence Cryptographic and Intercept personnel. 2. Organisation equipment and technical supervision of all Y Units  Intelligence and Signals and organisation of Special Communications. Note As regards American Y Units the provisions of para 2 will normally be the responsibility of S.I.S. C.S.O's staff acting in close liaison with Sigs.I.  3. Collection and collation of information from all Y sources including other Services Allies and civilian Post Office authorities. 4. Constant liaison with Air Staff Officer controlling R.A.F. Y activities in the Allied Force to ensure co-ordination of intercept work as between the two Services and to facilitate interchange of information. 5. Interpretation for and distribution to the Staff of all Intelligence resulting from Y activities. 6. Supply to Field Y Units of essential technical working information relating to enemy codes map systems call-sign and frequency-allocation. 7. Co-ordination of jamming in the Field use of offensive wireless camouflage NOT propaganda broadcast . 8. Advice in conjunction with S.I. and the Political Section on the use of captured broadcasting stations. 9. Cipher security as regards transmission of Y traffic between formations and between Y Units under Allied Force H.Q. 10. In addition the Senior Staff Officer Signals Intelligence may a. Receive Ultra messages and co-ordinate their distribution in conjunction with named Officers of R.A.F. l as directed by me. b. Communicate direct with the Senior Staff Officers of other Army Y Services both in the U.K. and Overseas. 21 October 1942. E.E.MOCKLER-FERRYMAN. Brigadier G. S.  A.C. of S. G.2.Section.,  copy oLwWa  MOST SECRET MOST SECRET By authority of C.-in.C. A.P. Initials  E.E.M-F. Date 14 Oct.42. ALLIED FORCE HEADQUARTERS. Office of the Assistant Chief of Staff G-2  B.389.798. Memorandum to Chief Signal Officer A.F.H.Q.  Subject Relations between Signals Intelligence G.2. Section and Signals Intelligence Services Chief Signal Officer A.F.H.Q.  1. By order of the Commanding General and for the better co-ordination of intelligence derived from other sources but of immediate value to Signals Intelligence Services as well as to provide a channel of communication for intercept and radio position finding information between Special Staffs and General Staff a Signals Intelligence  Sigs.l sub-section of G-2 Section A.F.H.Q. is now being established. Appointments to this sub-section are being made partly from American Offices with S.I.S. experience and partly from British Officers with intercept experience so that liaison with both British and American Units performing similar functions may be achieved without difficulty. 2. In order to achieve closest liaison between G-2 A.F.H.Q. and Chief Signal Officer A.F.H.Q. and specifically between Sigs.l. and S.I.S. the following general principals will be observed a. Sigs.l will be the normal channel through which intercept information obtained by S.I.S. is passed for the attention of A.C. of S. G-2 A.F.H.Q. b. All technical information of assistance to intercept units received by Sigs.l will be made available to S.I.S. for onward transmission except that in the case of British Forces this will be passed through G-2 channels to I Branch next lower H.Q. c. All intelligence information likely to enable intercept units to evaluate the importance or otherwise of the traffic they are taking will similarly be routed through S.I.S. and G-2 channels. d. Conversely Sigs.l will receive from S.I.S. all technical and intelligence information as defined in paras b and c above for onward transmission through G-2 channels to 'I branch next lower British H.Q. e. Sigs.l will also have access to all messages whether decoded or deciphered or not and logs received by S.I.S. in order to co-ordinate these with similar traffic received direct from I branch British Forces. f. Co-ordination of intercept tasks as between American and British Units will be effected by mutual agreement between S.I.S. and Sigs.l. By command of Lieutenant General EISENHOWER.  P.T.O.,     E.E.MOCKLER-FERRYMAN. Brigadier G.S.  A.G. of S. G-2 Section. DISTRIBUTION A.G.of S. G-2 II Corps Signal Officer II Corps  G. S.I. First Army H. Q. Western Task Force w., , 0u& \  THE WAR OFFICE  LONDON S.W.1.  H.I.8./A.2025 MOST SECRET 20th January 1943.  Memorandum for -   All Members of the Y Committee.  1. We attach hereto a copy of a Secret Cipher telegram received from A.F.H.Q. This telegram is in reply to our Proc/PK/159 a copy of which is also attached. 2. This letter telegram is in reply to Colonel Forrer s telegram forwarded under our M.I.8./A.2025 of the 11th January 1943 and discussed at the last meeting of the  Y Committee held on the 13th January 1943. 3. We would like the points raised from Colonel Forrer discussed at the next meeting of the Y Committee. Colonel G.S.  Distribution Brigadier A.L.Harris Captain J R.S.Haines Commander C.Loehnis Colonel R.G.Gambier-Parry Colonel C.V.L.Lycott Lieut.Colonel G.H'.S.Balmain Lieut.Colonel B.E.Wallace Group Captain C.S.Cadell Commander E.W.H.Travis H.C.Maine Esq. D.D.M.I. O .  0, MOST SECRET TELEGRAM  Prom Freedom Algiers. T.0.0 . 1145Z/18/1/Im personal for Lycett. Prom .Porror. OSLU/PK.46. Further reference your personal message PROC/PK 159 last paragraph Position as to American Y Units much more complex in view of information supplied by your branch to training section at Etousa in consequence of which Hayes and Coney expect l s personnel with units to handle Bird and Elephant Books which are not held by our  B Type Sections as well as considering forwarding Edward for processing to Bicher and Washington 6p direct Signals Links without passing through me. Am amazed at detailed information highly secret nature imparted by Lithgow to Coney now in this theatre making it difficult for me to exercise any restraint on eventual tasks which they may consider fruitful. Have also heard that Bicher has photostat copies his own.make of above books but cannot naturally confirm. Have succeeded for the present in stopping requests direct to Bicher for despatch of copies thereof. Suggest that whole position of relation between American and British Y needs clarification and definition as Nettle has so far been only half grasped and many ends left loose. Would appreciate a directive from Y Board covering following point  1. Direction of all intercept tasks in this theatre vested in A.C. of S. G.2. and exercised.by Sigs.1. Y . 2. Sigs.one responsible for issue of all technical Y documents and the level of their distribution. 3. Sigs.one responsible for cipher security of raw material to U.K. k. No raw material to be forwarded Washington direct Unless this is done before arrival of units trouble may ensue. My own directive from Mockler-Ferryman quite clear and f'enforceable as far as internal this theatre but much additional v/eight would accrue from formal pronouncement based on security grounds from Y Board covering external relations., .    COPY.  /  MOST SECRET CIPHER TELEGRAM  Prom WAR OFFICE To PREEDOi . / AsQcJ Pl t  FIRSTLY LIAISON WITH FRENCH YOKE UNIT SHOULD BE DEALT WITH CAUTIOUSLY AS ALTHOUGH OFFICERS OP UNIT.MAY BE GOOD ALLIES WE ARE UNAWARE OF .ATTITUDE OF HIGHER AUTHORITIES TO 'WHOM RESULTS.MAY BE..REPORTED AND PROGRj.MI/G DIVULGED. YOU SHOULD COtepafYOUHSELF TO OBTAINING THEIR COOPERATION ON R/T AIR TO GROUND 'SAFETY SERVICE. OTHER MATTERS BEST LEFT ALONE./ SECONDLY INFORMATION HAY BE EXCHANGED WITH UNITED STATES YOKE UNITS ON SAME TEVEL 'S 'TA IMPART  g-- ---I'-... . 'r ..-.. TO OUR BAKER TYPE SECTION. /  1513/1/432  0,  M/ b/m.z  19319 Wt.28200/244 50 000 9/41 A.& E.W.Ltd. Gp.69S J.404S NO MINUTES TO BE r COVER WRITTEN ON THIS JACKET FOR BRANCH MEMORANDA Unregistered., MOafr SECRET. AZ/176.. 8th. February 1943 Dear Harris Your note to Chainnan Y Board attached I have ascertained that Bicher is not sending 'Ultra information in any form to Hayes the foimer has been asked by lycett not to open another channel of W/T.I. information to Hayes parallel to that existing between Lithgow and Biddulph. Bicher seems unhappy about the lack of contact between Forrer and Hayes and thinks that even though Biddulph is getting the information from us it may not be reaching Hayes.  I have therefore arranged that copies of all telegrams sent to Biddulph by Lithgow shall be copied to Bicher who will then find out from Hayes if he is getting the benefit of the information and let me know. Brigadier A.L. Harris r.hai -rman Y Committee, MOST SECRET.  CHAIRI'JM 1Yf BOARD.  I1  Reference the attached I saw Wallace today and he produced these extracts from his letter. He was in fact only trying to pour oil on troubled waters as a result of a very rude letter from Forrer to Lycett to which the latter decided not to reply.  Para.2 of CXG 101 is not at all satisfactory. These B.M. reports according to Wallace contain certain Ultra information. It seems odd that Lycett has agreed to send these extracts via Richer to Hayes. There may be good reason for this. I think this needs looking into. Travis may knoYJ something about it.  If you wish me to look further into the matter I will take up with Travis in the first place.  1st February 1943.,  . f iftj t&j attracts fron persons.1 letter T/. MjL1G3 to FOBESai I'S Jan IS. jPara g. As regards your relations with 11 1.8. it is obvious they do not and could not dictate the   ta sks for your Army or Corps Units but it is equally certain that unless your Units take and you wire to lT.E. material of another sort your Staff won t get the answers which they must have. As you know there are certain m/f networks of great importance which can only be heard by your s people and that stuff is wanted for its own value and to provide a means of getting at other things Para 3. As to the nature and extent of our co-operation  and therefore yours with Bicher we are all rather worried. Far too much has been said and the result might lead to a competition in regard to the most secret matters. The Committee and Board are just now faced with this and must evidently decide some policy para 4. I don t know whether there is anything we can do to help you If you feel that personal representation to W.G. or B.P. of any of your troubles by me would assist I think' the only way' would be for you to ask Uockler-Perryman about it para 9. Refers to possible despatch of a Y Unit belonging to First Army still in U.K.  para 10. Refers to personnel questions affecting an A-and B -type and the possibility of our supplying an Officer reinforcement for one of these Units. 1 Feb 43., DECODE OF TELEGRAM   a H cded in at REMARKS pi Af'p S C U ALGIERS  Typel route DATE 26.1.43. %u C f V TIME 24.30 BST u  b Received in London foATE TIME 27.1.43. 03.15 B.S.T. /. 1 CXG 101 In 3 Parts .  From FORRER for X.W. for WALLACE  x.  Delighted with your letter dated 15th January just received. Will write more fully but anxious you should know certain aspects immediately.  1 Your Para.2 Am not really bloody minded but was stung to fury by arrogant telegram from LYCETT. Am sending back daily by air courier about 160 messages and have booked a maximum total of 25.000 groups via R.A.F. High-speed Link only waiting for LYCETT to indicate call sign for through routing. .  2 Your Para 3 Entirely agree and was horrified by signal from LYCETT received to-day stating extracts from B.M. report would. be sent by BICKER to HAYES whilst I have been clamouring for something similar and received nothing. Have protested vigorously and asked for channel to be via me. end of Part X .  PPtQTJL 3 Your Para.4 Excellent idea for COUSINS COUSINS .  Hopelessly green will be many weeks before sausage-meat comes out of machine. Suggest you advise me privately broad nature of decision taken by high-ups when will request M F to act as indicated in order to have your backing to putting a decision over  4 Your Para.9 Cabled LYCETT 19th December asking for  EASTERBBOOK Party to be despatched immediately after 46th Div before remaining formations belong their parent but received reply 89219 dated Christmas stating that they would not be despatched unless parents sent also emphasizing no despatch unless in Sugar Donald con y priority list Took matter up with equivalent HEKET an lues bef  inclusion in Kitty Monkey 10 but doubtful result if War Office unwill ingly sent Party ahead of Headquarters. follows ., 2  DECODE OF TELEGRAM REMARKS   a H nded in at [place S.C.U. ALGIERS.  Type routed    b Received in London  DATE  TIME CXG 101 continued  PART III.  Gould you urge their despatch as SKILLEN.  with difficult COUSINS and Second Party that area would help greatly if not unduly delayed.  5 Your Para.10 My suggestion to LYCETT was ARMITAGE command MCELROY go home and newly fledged subaltern be provided which would work well. Had considered BEST but considered erection  A. type D/F net work full time job which BEST well qualified carry out. Unwilling ROB YOP but suggested attached subaltern would be quite suitable Hope this makes sense. Copy to C.S.S plus extra copy .  X.W.,  25133 Wt.23572/3634 100 000 7/43 A.&.E.W.Ltd. Gp.698  26508 Wt.48858/4592 100 000 1/44 J.5286  NO MINUTES TO BE WRITTEN ON THIS JACKET BRANCH MEMORANDA B.M. COVER  Unregistered  Reference Number of Subject.  Originating Branch. s /VjC    ctAs-.f'. &A - JZ. 7  NOTES ON THE USE OF BRANCH MEMORANDA  See paragraphs 160165 Office Instructions 1943 1. The existence and movements of a B.M. unlike those of a registered file are NOT recorded by Registry. 2. B.Ms. may ONLY be used as   . ENCLOSURE B.Ms.For action on letters or other important papers when the appro priate registered file is not available. When it is essential for a branch to obtain quickly the views of a number of other branches and these branches are not likely to need to refer to the file in order to formulate their views it is often appropriate to send  Enclosure. B.Ms. simultaneously to each such branch. Enclosure B.Ms. or the substance of them must be enclosed in the registered file at the first opportunity.  . INTERNAL DISCUSSION B.Ms.For  domestic  records or discussions within a direc torate etc. or for other preliminary soundings on any questions which may or may not at a later stage require a registered file/  c COVERS FOR UNIMPORTANT LETTERS ETC.B.M. covers may be used when a jacket is essential for unregistered correspondence unlikely to involve much inter branch discussion. 3. If a B.M. has or acquires any genera importance the branch concerned should Knk the B.M. to a registered file at the earliest possible moment in one of the following ways   a By sending the complete B.M. to be registered and thus raised to the status of a registered file  J By transferring the B.M. as an enclosure to a registered file. 4. The branch originating a B.M. must be informed if the B.M. is registered or inserted in a registered file by another branch. jf Referred to Date Referred to Date Referred to Date    i \  J  f '\ % % \  / / \ %  y7// \, TOP OKGRi-T U' . OUT To OiL.U. Prom G.O. & O.o. ULTRA. PRIORITY ML No GGCv .8498. Rate .1&..12. -/ . Trioles one. Following for Air Commodore CHLoHlitL from A.C.A.S.I Reference your oKY.6174 oKY 6016 and my interim reply to latter have received following from DU BOULAY  Understand that O CONNOR has instructions from Sigint Board not to take action regarding indoctrination for pereormel in C. . .0. until LAMPLOUGH has completed his visit there and produced complete list of names and appointments of those- .ho should he indoctrinated. He is expected to report in about a fortnight. Suggest that U.J. Havy should be approached with full and complete list in preference to requests piecemeal as they are more likely to respond to former . Doubt if DU BOULAY can help further at this stage. Typex Bones. T.O.Q. 152137Z/12/44  Distribution  Group Captain Winterbothara  A.G.A.b X Secy. Sigint Board Director., RS-DiSTRIBU'i'IOH h&lH3 /W.I. TOySSjCEBET Ml M TO Cr.G & G.3. for Air Ministry  From S.L.I KAHDY from a. 3.F A.  ULTRA IMliFDlATB PRIORITY  HQ 3KY. 6174. nate 1Q.12.44 Triples HOIffl  personal for a.C.A.S. I from CHESHIRB.  Your GCOB. 5560 dated 28 HovemUer.  Would appreciate urgent action as American Army officer nov acting 8.A.8.0. at this k.q. and Navy have raised objection to his receiving yavaj. ultra quotin WASHINGTON decision. Shipping targets given first priority here and majority shipping Inforraation derive from ultra. It is obviously impossible to exclude . .0. from ultra vihioh provides information of immediate operational iroportance but Navy vdll probably refuse to supply further ultra unlee h. . Q. excluded.  2. question being taken up by n./ . a. but request that you also press WASHINQTOH for immediate and favourable decision. Only three named u.' . Army officers at present permitted receive Naval ultra this theatre pending decision on wider distributioD request name s.A.S.O. Brigadier general MCOONIIIL be added to this list.  TYPMS I.Y. T.0.0. 1104305/18/44.  I' 1588 T.O.R. 1113292/18/44.  cypher office  1117802/18/44. pistributlon j.I.s.  Group Captain winterbothara  A.C.A.S. I JIS/SK  0.n.u. File,  p fQF S1CRIT oil TO i . . v' r'3Y From H.n. Y '-i. ULTltf IIIL 'Kgr ITS fJO r'-r-'n 5300. pate 3S 44 . riglnt- me. For 'T-F-rtFF per orusl from .n . Your nKY 6ol of 26/11 referred to  f'-TTY'- -TflN for advice. 'fypex BORee. T.O.O. 2aiiK 87./l 1/44 Distribution  Group captain wim erbotimra  . . . 1 Bee. niTint no rd Director qecsj JID/PTO, T hrsjttz /  TOP U IN To G.G. & C.S. Prom S.L.U. KANDT. DJPORTANT No SKY 6016. Date 26.11.44 Triples Nil. ULTRA. personal for A.G.A.S. l fforn CHESHIRE.  Very great difficulty is being experienced by our having to deny USA Army Officers access to Naval Ultra. A number of such Officers are holding responsible positions in both S.A.G.S.E.A. and Air Command. Inability to pass them certain Naval material is seriously impeding the efficient execution of those responsibilities. A still greater degree of integration in this Command is now under consideration and the continual denial of Naval Ultra will render the situation almost impossible. There fore suggest the case be again presented to Washington in the strongest possible terms. Typex BONES. T.0.0. 2611302/11/14. HR 5184. T.O.R. 2618502/11/44. Cypher Office 2622062/11/44. Registry . T.D.S. A.C.A. S. I Secretary Sigint. Board. 4. Director GOGS. 3, OUT   TOP SECHET U  To S.L.U. KMOT  Prom G.C. & C S.  niSEDIATS  No GC S 3493 Date 17.11.44. Triples Nil.  ULTRA.  For LAMELOUGK from c .  Your SLK 5933 and 5936.  1. G.O.I.S.S.P. s reading of GCCS 0245 of 25/10 is correct. Evert this concession only obtained with greatest difficulty. 2. por your information TRAVIS informed unofficially in Washington by G2 that they had requested Navy Department in writing for complete interchange of ULTRA between U.S. Army and U.S. Navy in theatres abroad. Prom Navy Department TRAVIS  learnt off the record that early success of this demarche was unlikely.  3. If in your opinion concession set out in GGGS 0245 inadequate to meet situation only means of dealing witn matter would be for SACSEA personally to refer it to Joint aniofs of Staff Washington but only via ULTRA route London. 4. D.N.I. concurs in the above. 5. please pass to C.O.I.S.E.P. Typex BONES.  T.O.Q. 1719Q3z/llA4 'p.B.F. I.P.C.  ACTION INFORMANON Director General. Director 3 .  1 d.d. n.s. 6  D.N.I. D.D. IAS. olease pass . Ondr. X.C. via D.D. N.S. . G/0. Winterbotham. Sec. Sigint Board. 3 . Brig Karris. D.D. A.S. . D.D. h.w. ., ZPP M Tot a.0. & c.s. azmm mxat&sm comm. Fvcm a.i u. KANDToiau not su 5933-Date i6.11.Wkmwm  Triplea Mil. ESSll from 1 ollovring for C.S.S. himself C.O.I.S. Oolccjbo j efaroaoe QOCS 02 5 of 2ftfe October and HU ZTIOkSS. Qcfe er to C.O.I.S.E.F. 1. icta ppotatisai put on this signal ty O.O.I.S. is that Any and Air Force material obtained from tj.s. Essral Ultra mey not be aliown to Araarieaa Aaaoy or Any Air C carps Officers exo t those narasd. we eould be grateful for cwnfimotion that this is the intention in view of following facts. 2 fySAGSl 7 XMOS and DSB3 scries from WaahAagtoa issued ly Special Bramah M.I.S contain matcarilal from Koval sources relating to purely Air and Any subjects circulation is not limited to officers named in signal above. 3 Staff of Air Cctaaand is and staff of Allied Land Forces Fart 2. sill shortly be integrated. It is set pwesticablc to day Anetrioan Any car Any Air Corps officers access to information i-egarding their own services tshieh idll be known to their scarier and auboixyi tes and rixicSi may well be of vital h ortanse to their work. 4 Majority of cur information on irry Garrisons weapons and v defences of Andamans -Hioobara Era Isthmus m& parts of umntra and our iixforrmtion on Jay H rsl Air Fca ces tills theatre comas from K val source. rfhis infonaatiosi aust be mn in fRa&iaed or original form by Mmriom offioara on ity staff and m Intelligence staffs of B.u.3. I and Major Cenaral StratesasyM 5 Consider tlverefore that interpretation in uy para cm is entirely unwor ble in this theatre.  Continued Overleaf, n 2m CnJy aoXuticos to bes  a Mofllifftoattaa of wiling at least to extent that iafcarsaatiors tram. Hawal Ultra on ]lilitsay ana iJs iaattera aareotiog i5.li.A4J. utm be sai asraalafolo to iwam&my teame&mm Aw r ana Air Ciffieers serving in iJifcolligcmo staffs tills theatre.  b It mist bo accepto l that no Ammimm . rtf or /rEgr Mr Corps offieer om serve in ai r itatolligcnco Staff -.aher isnowleago of this mterial is nooessaiy. 6 Would be grateful for veay early r ly as I have not yet disGussad the hsplioaticaie 'frith iMvsc&m Allied Gfssiiaaler. lypas li T.0.0. 16l315a/l144 Fart 1 HR 3603 f.0.0. 16133Q./I1 fe4. Part 2 m T.C.O. 161325-/1144. fart 3j m 2606 T.O.R. I6a00a /1l44. Part 1 cyiiher cffico 2.C.H. 161 1 /1144. Part 2 cypher office T.O.R. I6l05tt'/H44. part 3 cypher Offioe f.0 .l6a345Vl1.Mi- i art 1 T.o.a. I6a0 ra/t1 4t .. part 3 T.O.R. 161945-/1144. F t 2 S I.P. action FORM 1 Direetcar 3 Connajuter I4J. B.P. il.S G/fcaptedn MasterfeeHtes . Seoretary SiMpt Board 3 Br'igaSiar Harris B. B 3 .2 . iUS C. P, , TOP SECHET COHC  2710 t-5A October  Date 27.1 .44.  To O.O.I.S.E.P.  SPECIAL ONE TIME TABLE  From Admiralty  Personal frora D.N.I.  Director of Intelligence of Navy Departi ent and  Admiral Redman have agreed that General Lampleugh may pass to Major Generals Wedemayer and Stratemeyer and to Brigadier General Pape while they hold their present  appointments any items of Japanese Naval Ultra material which he considers necessary for planning and conducting  operations against the Japanese.  2. Request therefore you will inform General Lamplough to this effect and will supply him with the complete Naval output asking him to make the necessary discrimination. 27104-5A  for D.D.I.G. 1260  Distribution  D.N.I. 2 D.D.I.C. 3  D.D.N.S. G-roup Captain ffinterbotham Secretary Sigint Board D.D.A.S. D.D.M.W. Brigadier Harris Repeated Colonel O'Connor by bag with reference to CXG 212 of October 23rd., 'r-.iP SfalCRBT U  \ 11 1  To4 G G & G. So  From S.L.U. NEW HEHI.  No GRO 211. Date 15.8.44. triples SIG INT.  ULTRA.  personal for Chairman SIGINT Board from CMTHOHN.  Reference telegrams ending with your 1054 of 10/10/43   1 Question of American P.E.A. personnel cooperating with E.I.S. here seeing ULTRA material was satisfactorily settled on lines of   my 2994/L of 21/8/43 as far as USA War Department material is concerned. Difficulty has now arisen over them seeing ULTRA from Naval sources which E.I.S. gets via ANDERSON by arrangement with C.O.I.S.E.F. latter referred to Washington Naval Authorities who replied Reports  based on or containing ULTRA are not to be shown to SEA .  2. Terns this reply suggest Naval Department may not appreciate fact that only one member of pfA is involved or icnow conditions under which he is given access vide my 2994/L individual concerned is senior SEA representative with E.I.S. 3 Present position is that he has access to all ULTRA with economic bearing except Naval ULTRA whereas E.I.S. has access to alL Practical difficulties inefficiency and danger of this anomaly are obvious. Could BISSEL be asked to explain situation to his Naval opposite nu her or any other method which may occur to you be tried to remedy it.  4. I have not consulted C.O.I.S.E.P. about this signal. Typex BONES. T.0.0. 160707Z/8/44. HR 2035. T.O.R. 162225Z/8/44. Cypher Office ., % MOST SECRET. COPY. Prom WASHINGTON J 15.3.UU-  OXG. 345 Your OXG 8L\.6 of 12th March. Your B. Yes cleared by G-2 to final indoctrination by Runnals and in the case of Hamilton covering author ity by Stilwell. Distribution D. D. 1 Chairman Sigint Board Group Captain Winterbotham D. D. M.W. D.D. A.S. D.D. N. 3.,  MOST SECRET.  12.3.44. CXG. 846  For O CONNOR.  Your GXG 3 of 17/1/44.  A. I.W. I.S. now inform us McCune head of FRA. of DELHI and FOWLER HAMILTON have been checked and maynow see all relevant ULTRA material with strict reservation that nothing based on this material be passed to their superiors in Washington. B. We presume this permission has been given by War Department. Distribution  Director Deputy Chairman SigintBoard Group Captain Winterbotham  D. D.tM. w. V D.D. A.3. D.D. N.3., MOST SECRET. Prom DELHI 27-1.44 CXG. 980 IMPORTANT. STAR 7. Your 211 of January 25th. A. Whole matter taken up between D. M. I. MCEUEN and RUNNALS 2 weeks ago see IJC 577 Ja. 12th RUNNALL'S request Washington agreement to pass ULTRA to MCEUEN's P. E. A Colleague still unanswered so P. E. A. is shown no ULTRA and McEuen is coupletely clear on this. B. Joint report cirtilated by D. M. I. to following four members Signals Int. Board for official discussion by them Lamplough D. M. I. Hillgarth and Jonas. With the exception of Lamplough they will wish maintain existing systems of distribution. Am now supplying them with specific exanples of violation security rules  see part 2 para. A l of report on D. M. I. 1 s request. Distribution D. D. S Deputy Chairman Sigint Board Colonel Tiltman Mr. J.E. S. Cooper  H.N. S., MOST SECRET. COPY.  To DELHI  25.1. .  GXG. 211 -IMPORTANT.  STAR.  A. In vfew WASHINGTON embargo on ULTRA being passed to EconomicWarfareinU.S.A 0.E.W. theynaturallyinsist embargo should run to O.E. W. representatives in the Field which includes F. E. A DELHI.  B. In tew of close collaboration MCEUEN of E. I.S. with feis his F.E. A. colleague please ensure that he understands clearly that no ULTRA may be shown to F.E.A. Colonel VICKERS Director of Intelligence at Ministry Economic Warfare LONDON accepts this position and'MCEUEN under stood to be already axvare of embargo and acting accordingly but recent assurances given to WASHINGTON by LONDON necessit ate position being absolutely clear cut. C. You should act through D. M. I. Distribution  D. D. S Deputy Chairman Sigint Board Colonel Tiltman Mr. J. E. S. Cooper H.N. S.,  n&  IjDST SECRET This is a copy. The original has  From -WJSfffliffiEOI been retained under section 3 4 of the Public Records Apt OXC-3 Following for D.D. s from OsGGMQR.  Pi ti '/xiLv- ''  Your CXG 362 of 14th January. Confidentially  1. M3GOMvlM2K is in favour of the proposal and hopes to persuade CL.4EKE /ho says he has no intention of being persuaded. 2. He opposes in principle the idea of lifting the etiibargD on O.E.W. representatives in the field until such time as we may be able to get things buttoned up with O.E.W. head office in WASHINGTON. 3. He draws an analogy from X.B. difficulties .and says he does not want to have another situation on his hands. Disti-ibution D.D. S Chairman Signal Intelligence Board Group Captain Winterbothajn Mr. J.E.S. Cooper Colonel Hitman Mr. Birch., , ST SECRET. HR.3173  To G.C. & C.S.  Prom I.W. I.S.  IJC/577 of IS/l/M  For Chairman LONDON SIG. HIT. BOARD from GENERAL LAMPLOUGH.  Your Ultra 1843 of 7/1  Position is as follows  1. MCEUEN M. E.W. Head of Economic Intelligence Section is closely cooperating with MCCUNE of P. E. A. late 0. E. V/. in study of Japanese economic intelligence and is also by unofficial arrange ment utilising translation facilities of 0. S. S. 2. 0. S. S. have completely independent economic team v/hich has just arrived but with which there is no intention of E. I. 3. or P.E.A combining. 3. Collaboration between E. I. S. and P.E.A. does not extend to ULTRA PEARL THUMB material existence of which P.E.A is ignorant. §. J. I.C. A. is responsible for coordinating activities of all American quasi-intelligence organisations including economic in  telligence section of P.E.A. No Ultra E. I.G. is passed to J. I.C.A. whose only connection with E.I.S. is through MCCUNE of P.E.A. who passes to J.I.C. A. economic intelligence concerted with E.I.S. but  excluding Ultra sources etc.  5. MGEUEN also has as temporary arrangement through MCCUNE services of three Naval officers attached to J.I.C.A 6. P.E.A. are expecting further economic intelligence personnel whom they offer to attach to E.I.S. Conditions re Ultra etc. as in 3 above will continue. VICKERS of M.E. W. has full particulars. 7. Therefore move you refer to is limited to virtual amalgamation of E.I.S. and P. E.A. excluding Ultra etc. until such time as Washington lift embargo on latter as regards P.E.A. See Cawthorn's telegrams ending with Ultra 1054 of 10/10 in this connection. 8. I have consulted RUNNALS who has had no instructions from WASHINGTON but is asking WASHINGTON for agreement to MCEUEN discuss ing Ultra etc. information with MCCUNE when necessary on understand ing given in CAWTHGEN's Ultra 2944 of 21 August. 9. RUNNALS requests copy of above be passed to O CONNOR at WASHINGTON for Colonel CLARKE. Typex JC T. 0.0. 1330Z/12.1.44, COPY/  DRAFT.  To Major General Lamplough Personal. From Chairman Signal Intelligence Board  SW 0 CK-H-   I understand that there is a move towards forming a unit consisting of M.E.W. O.E.W. J.I.C.A. and  O.S.S. This will entail a matter of policy on dissemination and security with U.S. authorities. The present position is that Washington have refused to allow O.E.W. to have any Most Secret Intelligence and O.S.S. are strictly confined to Intelligence affecting their special duties. Although we are still pressing this point with Washington we have so far received a negative reply.  Colonel Runnalls has been sent to India as G.2 representative and I should be obliged if you could inform me if he has formed any view or has received any instructions from Washington.  I hope no decisions will be taken without reference to London Signal Intelligence Board., COPY/  MOST SECRET. L.R.762  To I.W.I.S.  Prom G.C. &.C.S IMPORTAITT.  ULTRA 1Q5U of 10th October.  For CAWTHORN from CHAIRMAN 'Y1 BOARD.  Your 3309/L of 6th October.   1 Your 321VL ot 25th September was passed to General STRONG through O'CONNOR which is our normal channel for telegrams to STRONG.  2 G.2. replied immediate decision would be negative but were investigating. They have now decided to send Captain RUNNALS previously called REYNOLDS as Special Branch Representative with STILLWELL He will visit U.K. en route and may arrive here October 11th when we hope to find out more exactly how he intends to cover E.W. Intelligence as well as general Y security super vision at both INDIA and S.E. ASIA commands. T.0.0. 22272/10.10.1943. T.ypex BONES T.O.D. 01 082/11.10.1943. Distribution  Chairman 'Y'JL Board.DUCli-U. OUtt-LJAUJCLU 3 copies D.D. S . 3 copies, MOST SECRET HR 1698.  To G.G. & G.S.  Prom I.W.I.S.  5309/L of 6/10 SIDAR  Chairman. Y Board from GA1TH0RNE  Your Ultra 982.  Please see my 3214/L of 25/9 and say whether or not my 29Uk/L was passed to General STRONG.  Both M.E.W. representatives here and new American Joint Intelligence Collecting Centre as well as myself want to know his reactions to my telegram which was drafted after discussion here with various interests concerned.  Cannot see what presence or otherwise of Chinese speaking officer has to do with point at issue. In any case if he goes to STILLWELL he will be in CHUNGKING not DELHI.  Typex Bones T.0.0. 1845Z/6.10.43  T.O.R. 0531Z/7.10.43 M.D. Distribution -   Chairman 3E Board 3 copies  D.D. S, H.R. 7629 HOST ShlCRCT To G.C. & C.S. From I.rt.I.So 321VL of 23th September  From OaTrtnoin  Can you confirm my 29V /L was passed to MILSTAFF Washington and by them to General STRONG As I have had no answer from latter propose sending him reminder direct -without mentioning subject.  T.0.0. 10202/25.9.1943 T.O.R. 25372/25-9.1943 Type BOMaS Distribution D. D. s, POL. F. ft m ii lift 50-6-143 4 POL ICY Oft i ftTERkOGAl i U u DISPuSAL ur .sCt.-iED I i ED AGLETS St AGENTS BROUG IT BY O.S.3. TO U.K. FOR I .A INiNG.  POLF50-6 -1 43-4/V 1 c.3 See Also LIST US IDE 3 OV Eft Officer or Officer or Officer or Section Date Section Date Section Date  Serial No. Serial No. Serial No. f5 e ijeNovl  \C  I't i 1cv f V -AH-in  fc-v 07«« L JfT ax £86ljfir £ 2  i C-  KV L. FILE HELD BY R2B S Form 238D POL. F.  30-6-143 4  ., Form R. .February 1932. I A. '12  Revised November 1939 cx .... Source MINUTE SHEET No. Date .. M.I.5/A.D.B.  We discussed at today1 s meeting the question of OSS agents coming to U.K. from the continent and you said you wished to discuss the matter with the Americans.  The position is that I have been given the names but no other particulars of four persons arriving shortly and described as being Category C. agents and have been asked to facilitate their transit through the controls. From what Norman Pearson said last night I gather that these people are coming to this country for training as parachutists and will be under guard while they are here.  I discussed the matter with Colonel Adam. He said that the current procedure in similar'cases with S.I.S. and S.O.E. is that if we are supplied in advance with names and particulars the individuals are allowed to proceed to their destination and do not normally go to L.R.C. He added that if you were discussing the question it would be advisable to cover the S.A.S. position too since that is obscure.  Meanwhile I am telling the Americans that the two people arriving today will be let through and that you will be discussing the general question with them.  M.I.5./War Rook/6. 14.11  4A. I i o .   JoLu  J. Noble. DISTRIBUTION ACTION PROPOSED, THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINER IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTiOf  DRAFT 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS  NQ\1 grOQ ACT 1958. X A was halcl .at Ryder Street on 13.Xi.44. t which tfee i'oliowlnt wars preaaivts Mr l t Uonum Pearson C.h.o. A-2 Wlii.4ton hco.tt yO.S.S. A' K iafeS-ito w s i fci inslgn George Feme/ Q.D.0. aectloii V Cep tain Coloiiel A4m -part of the Use ilr R. Butler  I ' Mr J. Hold Lt.-Col T.A. Robertson M.I.3. 2. The objleot o the saeotlng was to Olscuss proeehure auggestoU by M.X 2. which should be adopted by O.S.L. S.I. and 8 0 whan bringing agents Irom abroad Into the Unitad Kingdom 3. M.I.3 . explained that It would b ol great assistance if the ffrooedui Mxich in already in. lores as between if.1.6.  and M.Z.3 eould be adopted as between O.S.3. and If.1.5. 4. It was suggested 'that'the first requisite for aetting-up such a prooedure would to for O.o.C. to appoint an officer who could act as ilia oh&v ml between O.S.is. and h I 5 in the satae way as Captain acts as between and M.I.to. It waft then suggested thet agents who are recruited in the field and are brought toaoH to this country for special train ing toy any of the departments of 0 fshould. In all but exceptional cases be sent to the b.H.C. where they would undergo a security examination. This security examination would provide 0.6 & with a safeguard against ttic penetration of their organisations toy aber of ttt& enemy espionage organlaation. Past histories of Uw agents would to taxon and chocked up against mu fei.1.6. records. . A copy of the L.R.C. axmln&tlon report would bo passed through tho  liaison officer to the G.b.n. doparteont to whoa the body belongs. It would as lias hitherto beer the case be the business of the L.U.C. Examiners to give advice to the 0.6.6. /liaison officer, 6   7    8. THIS IS ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED -2--.   N DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF. THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. Hcsxf. jzjcrt Xiuison officer About Che 4 airabllity or otKwmwiHBr Accapting the body uu an aotivo Agent XX however there  Is proof that too agent Is a member of a Uerman espionage  organisation than a decision will have to be taken In con-   Junotion with O.K.iJ. as to toe hispoaal of the body which will In all probability mean his detention for the remainder  of the war in Camp 020 or some other similar establishment.  A discussion then took place with regard to the disposal of those bodies Who were found to be unsuitable for work as .' .4 ' agents after they had undergone their training in the United  kingdom. pointed out that the to Office were very nitoh against allowing foreigners Who had been brought to this  country for special training being allowed their freedofo here  and in feet insisted that they should either be returned to  their country of origin or interned in a special camp which it  is hoped will be sot up in the near future in the Isle of Han  until such tine as they can be' deported  0 S 8 raised the point of toe disposal of agents who went   sour end it was suggested that in these cases it would be as well for toon to consult M.I too could undoubtedly assist with their good relations with toe Homo Office.  \ The point was toon touched upon with regard to those agents brought Into the United lingdou by 0 § 6. for special purposes whom did not wish to go through the JL.R.C. exsmination Captain explained th t in those eases he himself had to be absolutely satisfied either by the head of an X X 6.   P bootlon or as toe result of receiving a chit from someone  highly placed in X X 6. to toe effect that the agent was all  right and that during his stay here M X b assumed full respon  sibility. for Mm. 0 B S enquired whether H t % would be  prepared to accept in similar ease which affect them a chit  from toe head of O.S.fi. St was naturally agreed by H.X.5  that tills would be acceptable  /9, Caionai & km pointed out that fch r mm mriam reguiutlung tthieh mm ted to bw-tehawd ta tn mmmttem wifeft Warning pmyl from Wmm such m bte provision of visas ate travel aociaaoiits etc.' owing to the fact that France was  now aw independent-oouritiy. He also enquired whether Qf C.  were bringing over my ailitary peraomei for training ' and that if so. It would fee possible to Bttm %hm to the L.H.C. for examination. '  It was also pointed out that it would bo of very material  aaaistance to the JU.IUC teminera and to Colonel Ada a 8 C 0 Qi'ganiaation if primming of a few days could fee given of the arrival of agents in this country. fhia would facilitate not only the passage of the'agent through the port of control t fcould also tend to speed up the fe.R.C examination as a certain amount of the work of loohing-iip could in this way fee done before Urn agent actually arrived., CONFIDENTIAL  Equal Br'rtiih 18 November 1944 TO Colonel T. A. Robertson MI-5 PRCM Winston M. Scott Lt. j.g. X-2 OSS SUBJECT Minutes of Meeting of 15 November 1944 Regarding Handling of Agents 1. Attached hereto is a copy of the minutes of the meeting held at 14 Ryder Street on 15 November 1944 regarding the handling of agents brought to the UK for training. 2. Miss Holland who took notes on the pro ceedings asks that apologies be made for inaccuracies. Incorrect names etc. in view of the fact that she was brought In after the meeting had started knew very few of the people present and at times was unable to hear exactly what was being said by the speaker., \ l inutes of meeting held at 5 00 p.M. 15 November-1944.. Bie following -.Tere present Lt. Colonel T A. .Robertson IEL-Y Colonel X. H. Adams .MT-f port uontrol Captain Mr. Johp Noble ' MI-V Kbr. Richard Butler MI- Nnsign Reorge Forney OSS Mr. John Jaldron OSS Mr.-Norran ii. Pearson OSS Lt. Winston M. Scott 033 Lt. 3dward Lawler 033  Lt.ooi. Robertson The definition of an accredited agent. I believe you can best explain this Captain. Oapt. As you know we give our agent a certain number. The sections who are going to use that man and feel feat they -know -enough about him to take the full responsibility for-it allot him in registry that number and he becomes an accredited agent Je get a demand to land an agent they ask if he is accredited. -Te say yes and number is such and such and then cheek on him. That man is now sufficiently proven to them to take full resocnsibillty Secondly there are certain people who are not accredited agents who have for some reason sufficiemt-importance to be landed as a special case. Those cases have to be submitted higher to deputise and have to be considered to get man exempted.from. LRC and then will he act. Pull responsibility for the individual in this country during that time is curs. Trouble-has arisen where Section would hear of a man who would be suitable and they would ring and say he is an agent and the termwas so loose that you couldn't tell-how much was known about the. fellow and' can't land people on those conditions taut have to have sufficient infornation about them. It was of importance to make the T Sections appreciate responsibility forcing them to put the man' into' registry and then there is no question about him. Mr. Pearson .fee they accredited from .Belgium for example before arrival uapt. .i. No they aren't reople are sent to LuU and get a security report and are recommended as either entirely suitable for use or unsuitable because of dishonesty or stupidity etc. the Ps/v recruited in the country can get an adequate security check in this country but Ps/w abroad do not get adequate interrogation  THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RElAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION, Lt. Col. Robertson At LRC they offer or reckon that if Belgian Czech or Dutch they do get a good security check and they can tell you whether.-they are what they sojj or not. It is to-our interests to safeguard your 033 interests and we believe we can render good service in this direction. Mr. rearson proposing straight LRC and not side door t Lt. Col. Robertson Side door interrogation is quite useless because they send a can in at 2 00. and want him out at jsQG and it can't be done as a nan must be there for two or three days. Cannot limit to Drench Belgian or Dutch but records of Germans will also increase but as far as pure enemy agents are concerned have agreement to have ail German agents recruited for work in the field through LRC. Mr. Pearson A man picked up in Belgium by our mission who is to be sent back here-only for parachute training under category C and met at the airport and he would then proceed to LRC hut not turned over immediately to our school will he come to LRC first of all Lt. Col. Robertson \Ye might say to you afterwards this nan X who has been brought in and is recommended for training is a bad man and you oughtn't to take him. Mr. Pearson Jculd you consider that advisory or executive Lt. Col. Robertson As advisory. Mr. Pearson If you didn't like a person and P Section did like him  we have no. executive authority -would he then be permitted to go to the. school hy jV Ltr Coiv--R.obertson If the school insists on it. If LRC had good reasons they would say they are going to put him through the hoop. We never reject the LRC advi&e. Mr. Pearson 'There is also the question cf ultimate authority on the thing and there might be something which we considered extremely unfortunate from a security point of view in playing back a particular person japt. Tnat would be a case of discussion. 'On case we knew that man .was due to go back. Lt. Col. Robertson There are various things to do with people. Gan give them special interrogation alongside our people. That means we should have to find them special accommodations have them there for a week and pass them back to the field. Then the type cf person who goes to the LRC released after security investigation the accredited agent -and the ethers who if you get high THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION /mac run Oi IQ Rl, enough authority will be allowed through ports for special reasons. Mr. Pearson V/ould you be prepared to take the Director of OSS's assumption of authority for putting him in Mu .. . Col. Robertsons An accredited agent can be sent to ihe school and we have sent them there because after all we may have had some doubt on subsequent behavior and had reports that conflicted and put him in school until it.was cleared up. There is no obligation on our part to send an agent to school if an accre dited agent. Lt.-Gol. Robertson 'The casual people coming over must go to school. Mr. Pearson My suggestion is that when we have finished the discussion that you Colonel Robertson present me with a memorandum outlining suggested procedure and restrictions which I can take with me to i Sections concerned for their acceptance rather than some thing simply brought up to them. Lt. Col. Robertson One other point. If you bring a chap back here and he has passed through to your training.people and they find that he is unsuitable we are bound under Home Office regulations to see that that man is not allowed loose. The Home Office themselves express the view that they would much prefer that 'these people be returned to their country of origin if possible. If on the other hand they can't be returned if bad' Germans etc. then the Home Office is prepared to put them in a special internment camp until possible to return them to their country. Mr. Pearson Let's say that you picked up a Dutchman who in getting over here in LRC was not as good as we thought he was or possibly not bad himself but had friends and connections w.aieh were bad that he came over here and was rejected and it soured him would you send him back to mis around in Holland to discuss the inadequacies of SIS Lt. Col. Robertson No. Should probably apply with your permission that that man be interned here. Mr. Pearson If allowed to go back he would probably again mix with the underground group and agents giving a bad report and thus would keep other agents from wanting to come over hers. He would be a menace to our other operations. The psychological effect would be bad. Capt. . I do think on ail these cases that discussion with your people 033 is of paramount importance when you get into a pinch but if you 033 let us know the difficulty we can nearly always get you out. Lt. Gol Robertson 'fie should certainly not try to continue the present set-up. -3, Mr.'Pearsoni Tae effort lias been to cooperate and it is oach easier than it ras two or three months ago. This makes it xjossibls to discuss some thing of this sort.  Snsign Forneys I assume that when one of our agents goes through your school we will get copies of interrogation Lt. Coi. Robertson h e will pass copies to you. LSr. Pearson like one for our files and one for the security office. 7 A ' oaptl-r What we have set ourselves out to .do is to provide some Mod of security organization for unfortunate people who have got to be dropped on the other side so that their life -will be made a little easier. Especially on 30 side because they work in groups. If you .get a bad man in the whole thing .'.'ill be over. Ur. Pearson Once these'men have be.en through LRC having been picked up at Port and brought to school and have finished school what is given them at that time  Capt. They are given permission to land11 get an IE-23 and from there they have to get civilian papers -registration card an identity card and ration books. They are ail landed on condition that they register with police and do. not take up any occupation except with permission of the Ministry of labor. They must register with police because otherwise they can't eat anything except Army rations and it makes them conspicuous by the fact that police get notification of their landing and nothing comes along showing them going through the regular procedure.  We would urge it -this registration. . Ensign Forney It is best to put them right through the regular paces.  Japt. Normality is the best policy. Mr. Pearson How long would you normally say ou Ri should'expect to be held up at school Lt. 'Jo1.Robertson From four to possibly six days. uapt . a minimum of four but seldom longer than six if there is any genuine reason for their coming out. Lt. Lawler Does the interrogation at LRC dispense with cur giving them information or helping them . Lt.Col. Robertson No. Any information we can give LRC should be given as it greatly hslps them. If there is any doubt about a trace they question him  - 4   original DixuwNmW AC ', on this particular phase. He is brought into 1110 and gives name address etc. then 'trace is started /ill is arranged before the man arrives. 'The interrogators have all the information before they start interrogation. Lt. Scott Is Mr. Pearson prepared to have sufficient advance notice of an arrival Mr. Pearson We have to try to cope with that and give 130 advance notice. Lt.'Jol. Robertson It helps but isn't essential to notify them. If you don't get advance notice he will not go to LHC but will have to go to another Section and wait. Hy way of explanation to Colonel Adams who has just arrived we are discusping an agent from the field to be trained here and explaining procedure adopted between ourselves and MI-VI in these types of cases. What has been agreed isthat I will write a paper for Mr.. Pearson to put our to his people. T/e also agree that there should be a focal point here and a focal point between our Sections. Col. Adams People are coming over as civilians and all sorts of people. If coming over as military personnel they are not agents usually but are staff people who for one reason or another have been given the Army privilege and'  in that position are not held by us as agents.  / Are they all persons who have been checked vetted from the other side Mr. Pearson Most cases of employees go immediately to our security officer. z-' Lt. Lawler Last moat 'troublesome case was. the Pioneer case that.came up from ..Africa. uol. Adams There is usually an agreement that if certified1by the British he can land riot under obligation to Land service personnel of any Allied Army. Lt.Col. Robertson If he has been in the Stench Arms'-and turned over to us abroad and has not been cults satisfactory and want him back here for inter rogation and would like to check up on security can you do sc Col. Adams Once he has been a Stench soldier in this country he is then exempt from the Alien's Order and can't be brought.under it if you bring him und er that name. Xi  IA.agrr-'-Robertscia-r-Yes there have been cases where they have used different names. Col. Adams Civilians coming over from Prance have to have their French Laissea-Passer and visa. THIS IS A COPY original document retained IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS CM l, uapt Bavo got to hare French documents and Laissez-Fasser from Frencia. The visa can be fixed on this side easi .y snough. Mr Pearson There have been a number of violations of it. uol. Adams Another problem arriving at IRC is that the French naturally are the most touchy people in the world and we had so roach trouble from the Foreign Office that now have instructions that people whose papers are in order and there is no reason to suspect them will not have to go .to the LRu. Lt.uol.Robertson 'These chaps will come under escort. uapt ... -They are warned on the otaer side that they must be given a security interrogation and they are put at ease as far as possible and in certain touchy cases. it is arranged to intercept them between Port and IRC ana take them to lunch and tell them not to worry that it is much better cover and we would much rather do it this way and they are happy about Lt.Ool. Robertson sihen people leave the country for good notification is sent to the Home Office . Uapt. when they go back papers .are returned to British and put in dead bee-aon. On ordinary cases ordinary travel we should slacken up a bit on the numberof people escorted to LRu. . 1s long as someone is coming with them they are covered by instructions from Headquarters. We should ring up D/ji' if someone is coming. Mr. Rear3on do you always know the precise airport where they are coming uol. Maras No out if they are coming from a certain destination. Dip usually have the information. If they arrive at an airport where there is not a SCO they are supposed to ring up a SCO before they get any clearance. DifF have many on their list. Ensign Forney If they come in from rrance our people will have to have these documents-even if they have an escort. Mr. Pearson -Are all those parachutists covered coming over uol. Adams 'They are all service personnel for special training and if not must be properly documented. That about 343 Cpeciai Air Service  THSlsfcrSv o, Lt.Col. Robertson They are service personnel under SILlEF but vdll bring back anythin' they can get hold of. They brought one fJenuan over as one of their am personnel and he was'an extremely important spy. SU3 is not under our control or 033 but under SliiaSr. 'Therefore we do not have to think about than. Ivri Pearson Our security officer receives these memorandums. Do you normally receive them Lt. Forney insign Forney i\To about one out of every ten. la . Pearson I v s wondering if Colonel Adams should put us.on a distribution sheet for that. God. Adams There is a 1943 Order being revised now and-an American Order of July 1944 which requests everybody except .kmerican Service personnel to go through the controls and argumenting on what you should have at the moment because of this feeling caused by the distinction and suggesting that Americans and British all go through the same controls sc that they are all properly identified. Mr. Pearson Do you think it a good idea that they be passed on to us here and then we pass them on to the focal officer Lt.Col. Robertson This can be arranged. Lt.Col. Robertson ./hen you get a focal officer the best thing to do is to introduce him to all our people.  Mr. Pearson Col. Robertson you will start the ball rolling by writing a memorandum. -7, .%c\ &t4t'Nc r'crZ'' hfvex lc - Us e -c'w I ' H-.  J  Mr.R.B Mo  Col. AdamA -t w. 4-A  Mr. y1 0do In  For comments please.  cl O'  / uL i As l &K/y Ze- 1 1 A -'U /   . & i -'iibLj   br cA ds 5 i Je-A. r -- Sts/VKA irro- . . t  16.11.53'. 1-' Avi 7 v ji-r 1 4. i&% -eL At 4. JL ftA. L ai. u ' Ajjo i r /k rr  9 4SATfJftT  r uv \  hfrr- Ut - stcz  .fXJ, Amendment to Paragraph 9.  Delete...1and that if so ... to end of sentence.  Add... Allied Service personnel arriving in the U.K. for the first time could be sent to the L.R.C. but not those who had already been in the Allied Forces in the U.K. In future travellers from France and SHAEF Zone if properly documented would not normally be sent to the L.R.C. hence prior warning must be given regarding those who should go to the L.R.C. Procedure regarding Germans would be different and requires special consideration., OP SECRET  I '  23i d Hovsaber 1944  Dear  I asi sending you herewith a drui't note together with oneoT amendment on the Ryder Street meeting held on the 15th Sovemher which you attended on benalf q Section V  Perhaps when you have read tills note you would he kind enough to let me know whether youagree with it or whether you have any amendments to make.  Yours sincerely.  T.A. Robertson  Lieut.-Colonel Captain  S.I.S. TAR/MIM i . ga, November J.SN4  Dear Pearson  I am sending you lieWXwJ1 a 1 0 CQjjjX'-iX wl al amoxici mont suggested by Colonel Adam to the draft note ox our sieeting at Ryder Street\ on the ibth Biovember Perhaps you would let me know whether you have any amend ments to make as X am anxious to have the principles set out agreed as soon as possible.  Yours sincerely  Robertaon .  T.A. Robertsox.  liieut.-Colonel Norman Pearson bsh. 0 w a.  TAR/MIM 2 encs, S. Form 81/B.P./3000/6.43. EXTRACT. Policy re disposal & interrogation Extract tor File No. .S I . .5Q./.3/143 .4. . .Nam o.f...Enemy..Aliens..arriving in U.K. for employment as Agents with O.S.S in File No.S. F. .5l/.32/l9. ..5. . .Serial ..S1. ..Dated .23- ll- -44- -. OriginalfromP.S./DG-.MInUt-S tO--A.-D .UnderRef. . Extracted on ....2il7. ll .44 . by ..S.tG .E. ..SectionR .7 l ... Extract from Minute between P.S./D.G. & A.D.B. re discussion with Home Office concerning Enemy Aliens training as Agents with S.I.S. S.O.E. & O.S S. 'ne asked me how I proposed that the arrangements which we had discussed should be completed. We eventually agreed that I should write him a letter setting out our proposals & the gurantees which we had obtained from S.I.S. I could mark this Top Secret and he would undertake to show it only to Prestige and to Perks and would then arrange that all these cases from the Home Office angle should be dealt with solely by them. I then mentioned to him that the Americans were asking for similar facilities and told him about the Meeting which you and I  'had recently attended. This proposal worries him even more than the proposal from S.I.S. but he says that if we can come to some similar arrangement with the Americans he does not feel that the Home Office can stand in their way at any rate for the duration of the war. We agreed therefore that I should not despatch a letter to him until we had come to some definite arragement with the Americans. I am attaching to the outside of this file your draft paper regarding the Americans and would P.T.O., be glad if you could let me know as soon as possible what progress you  succeed in making with it. If I can be of any help please let me know P.S./D.G signed Richard Butler 23.11.44, f S' ft C.R. No ... MINUTE SHEET No.. L.t0F e '  %y J A y y JfO'y tZviJ -/ /v . Ay J A / h- - P-c faZa & 7 x t e 'fet &/.& & r-tLu - t  - a i &- J-aL -J 2 Ze yfY vL Y'   JL - - & .  Aif   jul   30309. Wt.W21759/937. 312 000 7/43.  Army Form A 2007 Ins. Sheet .' K. & H. Ltd. G657/15. [P.T.O., In reply state NUMBER and DATE.  Secret.  V3/l9/iv/orK. dated 29.ll.it4.  V.c. aV  Dear  Many thanks for your TAB/kUM  A.D.B. dated 23.11.44. enclosing the draft notes of the meeting held on 15.11.44. with the Americans. As I told you in conversation I had a discussion with one of the O.S.S. officers and between us we dictated a draft reply to you. I would like however to emphasise that the reply will come to you from the Americans and that it is entirely an American reply. All I did was to endeavour to persuade them to take certain lines which I knew would be agreeable to M.I.5.'s way of thinking. At the moment of course I am not certain whether the letter will go in the form agreed yesterday or whether they will be able to persuade their operating sections the equivalent of our P. sections to comply with the procedure suggested though at least I am certain that O.S.S. X-2 will do their very best to bring this about.  My whole object in writing this letter is of course to place on record the fact that  S.I.S. cannot be officially responsible for the reply that you receive from the Americans j Naturally this letter is not for American eyes.  Tours sincerely.  Lt.-Colonel T. A. Robertson M.I.5.   Ism f London.  THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. rNPnvr WcN, mi a hq vmmwm Office of Strategic Services APO 4-13 Army  7 December 1944  Dear Robertson   'vj' /v. v  I much regret the delay in commenting on the minute of our meeting . of 13.11.44 for which you have my apologies. It will be I think best to reply point by point to it after which unless there are partic ular question which you might wish to discuss with me I shall hope that you will make a formal proposal of the measures to bo adopted by OSS in dealing with alien parties whom they are importing into the UK.  f ara Jlo 3. -Clearly it is desirable to establish some system which corresponds to the procedure already used by M1-&. Such a system.would naturally have to to based on a very clear definition  A Qf what constitutes an agent  1 Of wh at high ranking officer in OSS would apply for exemption from the L.R.C. in peculiar eircura   ''h . .stances  EsmJ&dJL-ws. are considering the appointment of a suitable officer to. act as the channel between you and ourselves in the same way as acts between you and M.-6  ' 4s we road this it would apply to all agent recruited 'in the field. Tliere is however a category of agent which we are now  nsing-which as far as we arc aware differs very decidedly from' any cate gory used by MI-6 These are agents who arc used for what may.beat be de  fined as individual tasks. They come to us from underground movements  and arc sent back in such circumstances that whether or not they go wrong   either by accident or treachery the nature of their work cannot implicate others and bring bout the latter's capture by the enemy . Such agents dome to the OK only for the purpose of receiving parachute training. There is of course no secret about parachute training both the methods and place where it is given are known to the enemy. We suggest that to send this.category of agent to the .L.H.C is unnecessary and w propose that  .you.should have them refuse leave to land at the .port of arrival and hand them over to us to be kept in custody. We on our part will undertake that at no tin would such individuals be left at liberty except within the confines of the training area. You will of course be notified both as to their arrival in the U.K. and their departure from it.  In circumstances when it is required to bring other  types of agents to the UK fox training or other purposes wo are ready to propone-to our operating sections that they shall not consider an agent as accredited unless we have had some six months experience of his reli, -2  abtlity whioh should enahle ua thorowihly to check o both his 'contacts and aethods of work If therefore it. is desired to bring to the UK an -agent who is not thus accredited . it is-agreed that he shall on arrival pass through the before being landed . In .eases of accredited agents they shall be entitled to exemptioa from I .K G should we so de sire it. For these we shall assume wS a.tever'responsibility may be necessai y  With the form that the security examination would take   as set out in the minutes and the handling of the reports on then . we are of course entirely in agreement Kara. Ho - -Wcrare quito prepared to arrange as far as it is pos. aible th a't any' agent who is brought to the UK for-training but who sub   proves unsuitable for work though not on grounds warranting his detention shall be returned to the country in which he was recruited. ha you yourself suggest there will.of course be.-occasions when the govermnetat of that country will not accept the ma back or will do so only   on ausb conditions that we should feel he was inadequately protected from undeserved penal measures. In those circumstances we should be prepared '-Mid -'indeed very glad. to use the special internment camp which you mention 1 It is also possible- that aa agent will turn sour ' in Tdiieh case it my-be  . felt unwise to return him to the point of origin lest hie return impede other reeruitmeBt in that area in.such cases the disposition of the bodies will perhaps beat be-settled nd hoc.  ' 1 Fare Ho. 7 -Tb-l-S point really appears to be adequately covered by ' ' what is set out in connection with Para S  '' Para Ho. 0 -We suggest that the. high ranking officer referred to in If nS -dl above should be either the Chief' of Mission Paris or London or whoever  in their absence acts for them.  iSgiste'  Para tfo 3 -It is obvious that the regulations such.as the provisions travel documents must be observed and-equally that any bodies brought over here.by ns. which are not refused leave to land and-delivered  1 to our custody must be furnished with the proper identity .documents which fcho ropulutloun prescribe shall bn held by aliens With regard to foreign.  AUied military pp.rso.imel w appreciate -that there-are difficulties in. sendln them to the J tH.C but it -is-understood that a technique has been cvoJvod which aighii be used in-exceptional circumstancesfe suggest that tho ofi iper-msntiened in vars should be instructed in this technique by  X ara H'o IQ. -Tho. importance of this is fully appreciated and every  '. eff'oi .'t. dli of course be .made to furnish iaformation in advance conearning any Individual going to the 1 11.0  'Ihis covers all. the points in the minutes but it is.perhaps desir able that we..should also specifically refer to agents of enemy nationality. It IS imderstoocl that arrangements are being discussed whereby enemy aliens..who are brought over as prospective agents can be sent to the  L.H.O. where they will only meet enemy 'aliens of their own type and not, 3 avowed Nazis and.we-naturally hopS that if this arrangeftlent matures enemy aliens reoruited by'us way also benefit by it. We appreciate howeyer that it is iinpossible for enemy aliens who prove unsuitable for worh as agents to be left at large in this country and. we therefore wish formally to express our agreement that if-such individuals cannot be returned to the place from whence they were recruited .they shall be in terned until such time as their repatriation can he effected. Yours very truly Norman Holmes Pearson Acting Chief X-2 it. Colonel T.A. Robertson MI-5 V/40/f Y/48 Mr R Yi. McKinnon Security Officer, / In reply state NUMBER and DATE.  Secret  S/i9/iv/org dated 8.12.44. V9c. Dear Robertson Would WouldWould you youyou very veryvery kindly kindlykindly refer referrefer to toto my mymy letter letterletter of ofof the thethe above reference dated d 29.11.44. 29.11.44.29.11.44. I II have havehave now nownow had hadhad handed handedhanded to toto me meme the thethe  original letter from O.S.S. which I enclose together with a copy of it. I hope and indeed think that you will be able to accept what they propose. For your own information I may tell you that the text of the letter is almost word for word as I dictated it in an interview where I was asked to suggest the text of the reply but the fact wtill remains that it is they who are making the proposals and not S.I.S. whose only part in the natter has been to try and assist both sides. With regard to para number 8 I venture to doubt whether from your point of view there will be much difference between the Chief of Mission Paris and the Chief of Mssion London as I am quite convinced that London would do what was asked of them by Paris without further ado. I think dso that you must be prepared for con siderable optimism on the part of the American operating sections when considering an agent as accredited. In other words I think the phrase  some six months experience will mean the shortest possible period which can possibly be made to come within this definition. On the other hand I cannot myself see how otherwise you will establish any proper definition of an A.A. Please let me know if I can help your side of things any further. I need hardly say that this is very much a letter for the sole consumption of M.I.6. and M.I.5. and not for American eyes. Yours sincerely Colonel T.A. Robertson London., In reply siato NTIMBBB and DATS.   S/l9/iv/A datei 10.12.44.  1  Y.c. Dear Baxter  As you are doubtless aware the Americans have been bringing over certain agents who have been refused leave to land and handed over to American custody. Such agents were only meant to come over here for parachute training and were going to be sent back on individual tasks of such a nature that they could not compromise other individuals or organisations. It was however made a condition that should the Americans desire to keep these people in the country longer than was necessary for the parachute training and to give them reasonable liberty they must first be submitted to interrogation at the L.R.G. and duly landed therefrom if security was satisfied.  They ask of course that the interrogation shall be side-door as they are afraid of a lowering of morale if they have to be kept in thw L.E.C. Tffou will be no stranger to such apprehensions which are always expressed with great fervour by everybody but as the Americans are trying very hard to get better security arrangements made -and believe me O.S.S. X.2. have no small task to perform -it would be appreciated if you coxild possibly make side-door arrangements for these four.  If you do feel able to accede to this request I suggest that when we tell the Americans that you have done so we make it clear to them that this does not establish a precedent and they cannot possibly expect sidedoor interrogations every time since other peoples' agents have not been so favoured.  Would you very kindly let me know what you can arrange as soon as possible.  Tours sincerely.  Lt.-Colonel Baxter  L.R.C., B.1. d/LBC/SF. 51/32/19 i 12 ]Xw aber i%4. Bear laianfc you for your letter of loth Dwwotor  referring to four aliens brought to this aawrtay by the jimerioaaa. As you know we do m feel tost a Ms door ' 'srrogation psruv&iss ary really adequate aecority ebeek as oaw pored -with & fall interrogation and isnrestlg&tion toils an alien is detained at toe I 1U& It is quite iapsealbls in a abort inter- Tiew to get toe tarato town a aan s ataxy if ha is deliberatsly trying to eittoold it. and an unplrosagt raanat eaqpsrisaee has done nothing to toasts oor distrust of sida deer intexrag&tisea. In toe four yon Busotlera Z should consequently Bush prefer that toe raen tooald be brought to toe in toe ordinary way and tost no apeolal priTilegea shotod be gitwa to tom. She delay at toe L.B.C. would not be wn r gwsfe If beewn you thiidc it topescdble to arraage wito toe Auarisetu toat toe mm ehould be primly held at toe L.B.C. X will try to gtwe aide door interrogations with all proper reservation as to toe tolas of. such interrogation. X think however it should be made quite dear to toe Americans that this is a special aoncssatoa which eannot be repeated. 3fo doubt they ere eamre of toe intnreasixg evldenoe we ears recelwlng penetration by toe Gaxrauw of mdstoaoe organlfsatlam on ton Uuntinent so toat ib aasBst ba assused that any person however well aeoredited im a loyul supporter af the Allied Caone. We feel toat to the ease of svwy person who to cosing leas and too is going to be enployed an onnftdential weato be should be gieen as thorough  ocasdnation as drearurfcwwee will peacsait. lours stoaeKwiy H.J.3sxter ht.Colonel. Captain 3.X.S. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED, 4 L3th December 3 344 Ea&r \X h'acy thanks for your latter ft /13/iv/crg of th etc.  ee ri er. I am Dsost grateful to you for all the trouble you have taken la assisting use over tfcs Mast ar o ' bringing 0.3.3. into line-   Froa the letter waien 1 tav received from njorsnac Pasrson it seom that tiers will be little dlififieulty in Kaduag to a smooth working agreaBent in the near future which will 1 hope be of isutual benefit to 0 3 S. ana oursel-res. -3  I sue nor in process oi getting out the fia paper a copy ol which I -will show you. I fully realise that you do not wish to bh assocluted with these negotiations as a &epsr s nt twit nerertheless youx aaoiateaea has bean invaluable.  fours aincersly  r.h. itoborfson Car.tain Lisut.-Colcnel t.r.1.3 . THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RhTAINrD  N DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDo t ACT 1958 p[Y nT, Secret. In reply state NUMBSE and DATE. YSAg. lv/A dated 1A.12. V.c. Dear 3az er ' Reference your S.P.51/52/19/1 datedi3 12.44 -I assume this is the correct date hut as you are probably aware the letter has not reached me and enquiries are being made as to its whereabouts Miss Backhouse has read me out the relevant portions however -as I am sure you already know we fully agree with your view that side-door interrogations are not satisfactory and we entirely appreciate that apart from the actual efficacy of the interrogation it causes you immense inconvenience in your routine to do these side-door interrogo.tions. I have however succeeded in arranging/Ath the Americans- that the four individuals mentioned in my VS/19/iv/A dated 10.12.44. shall come to you for normal reception and they will be down there at 10 a.m. on 15.12.44. I have not at the time of writing the name of the officer who will accompany than but I expect it at any moment and will telephone it through. He will ask for the Commandant. In addition to the above I have been asked to arrange for the reception of two further Belgian bodies who will be with you at 10 a m. on Monday and I attach particulars as furnished by O.S.S. of .. I think I ought to make it clear that I have only achieved this by assuring 0.3.3. that the interrogations of the individuals will start on the day of their arrival as soon as the usual formalities have been completed. Their R.L.L. slips and any identity papers that they have in their possession will of course be brought to you by the officer who escorts them down to the L.R.C. Tours sincerely.  n nq ic a POPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACl 1958. t\fc3\f A-gxv-i  Lt.-Colonel Baxter J. AU'W'-/a aM  t, W7' SECRET iA M-M X. It is understood i& M.X 5. that It will be aeeeesary for the various departnente of O.3.S. responsible for recruitins and training agents for work in neiay-occatied territory  to bring aliens to the United Kingdom for training and ether purposes. It is felt that a simple and straightforward pro cedure should be laid down as between 0 3 3 sad M.I.5 so that the following requirement common to both parties can be nett  a that an accredited country without arousing unnecessary suspicion byhis method of entry  b that in the security cheek should be provided by msans of the machinery set up for the purpose at the X. 1 .C.  c that means should be provided so as to meat the requirements of the Home Office namely that no undesirable alien shall be set free in this country thereby constituting a menace to security.  d that a focal through which all matters of this nature as between 0 3.3. and M.1 3 can pass. XI. I yaiamwim of m ac mmrr  V 1 Before putting forward suggestions for setting this machinery in motion it is necessary to define the tens   accredited agent . In our submission an accredited agent is an agent who has been proved by his work in the field to be reliable. M.X . are prepared to accept as on accredited agent one who has been working for six months cut is vouched for in writing by the Chief of 0 3.3. i&ssion in Paris or London or in the absence of either of these officials whoever is acting for them nt the time. .M mmitr. Prior notification of the arrival in this ocuntry of an accredited agent should be given at once to U L.5-who will tako the necessary steps to have him landed at the port and see that he is not directed as he normally would be to the L.H.C. The department of 0.3.3 to whom the agent belongs will be responsible for his custody and good behaviour while in this country. If by any chance an accredited agent should arouse suspicion then 0.3.3. are entitled to approach K.X.5. and ask them to conduct a security investigation of the agent .X M.I.J5. would also like to bo Informed about tbe departure from the Baited Kingdom of all accredited agents. A If ry c eJvowc . cwv Mfe Jr scL - v o™ te erf It X-5% ItZL unM-'CU trf. a-ny kS CrSS kaA rit. erf. Hr . C.l. fA.CvUeU.,  2 I .  c m  In the case of newly recruited agents brought Into the United Kingdom fro abroad for the purpose of putting than through eaten ire training courses M.1.5. would like to haw the ofaanoe of interrogating them at the L.R.O. where their atay will be kept aa short as possible compatible with the tlsta taken to conduct n useful interrogation but it would assist  M.1.5. materially if as much warning end as many details as possible could be given about tike agents before their arrival& 'flu.l.ft.t This will not only ensure a more thorough examination of the agent but will also spaed up the interrogation. Copies of these Interrogation reports will be handed to O.S.S. The purpose of this interrogation is two-fold   a to satisfy the security arrangements of namely to ensure that no German agents are sent into this country through these channels and   b to assist O.S.S. in determining whether the persons chosen are satisfactory from a security point of view and to provide a security cheek against tike penetration of their organisation by the german Intelligence Service.  M.1.5. see no objection to c.s.s. bringing to this country for short training i.e. parachute training recruited abroad mod allowing these agents to forego the security examination at the 1.B.C.&21.1 5 would like to have the names of these agents their dates of arrival and departure. Zt is understood that in this particular esse there is no security danger from the 0.S.a. point of view as the agents will he opexsting singly and will not .bo in a position to expose other jBasbars of tike O.S.S. organisation A. .  A // 0 S 5ot lotsp L dgeocfc L-X 6 2 -9 ci±Co 1&-JZ. C n -r U -03 llc x k U C CZ-. - ' Gru-C. 0  o-tu a c.u V 'x a oUC w at/ 4.Rt.m tncUA 16 / i vic e 01 jjiKjlwmmw\Ma   so far as agents of ene&y nationality are concerned M.1.5 are anxious to haws the opportunity of sxan&ng ell these eases at the L.B.C. is in other eases 13 1.5. wish to have prior notifi cation sod particulars of any agents of enemy nationality who are brought to the united Kingdom.for may type of training. Similarly M.1.5 v ouid like to be notified of the departure of  . these agents frosi the United Kingdom  vi.  gEm...Tim.3Efi§B E Zn accordacce with tike requirements of the Boms Office 23.1 5. have undertaken to see that agehts recruited far secret missions abroad who prove during tlisir training period to bo unsuitable are sot left at large In the Baited Kingdom. In sueh eesee they must be returned to their country of origin if   this is possible. If however it is impossible to return these agents to their countries of origin 13.1 5 would like to be consulted by O.S.S. in each ease so that the oases can he dealt with on their merits as and when they arise., I  m. vra. n   XX. 3   .  Zb the case of agents of sasscr nationality she it is found impossible to return to their country of origin the Home Office are prepared to inters a limited number v/u in the Isle of Kan until such tine as it may he possible to dispone of them M.I.3 wish to offer the maximum amount of aseistanee to 0.3 s. in order to ensure that their operations are successful end that their organisstiona do not become penetrated with consequent disastrous results by the German Intelligence Service For this purpose they are willing end anxious to put their reeourees at the disposal of C S 3 in as advisory capacity. M l 5 are anxious to make it clear that they are not interested in finding ant about or prying into the activities of 0.3.3. secret organisations but on the other heed it sill be appreciat ed that since M l 5 are responsible for the security of the united Kingdom they must therefore take every pre-. emitton to ensure that the mnmsy do mt establish agents in toe United Kingtom by penetrating allied secret organisations operating inside enemy territory. Finally would like 0.3.3. to appoint an officer who would aet as toe sole link between M.I.3. end toe 0 3.3. secret organisations. This officer will be pat oosspletely into the picture regarding M.I.5 methods and will translate M.I.5.' views suggestions and opinions to other members of his organisation who are concerned with those activities.  AS soon as agreement ie reached on toe above points and as soon as the 0.3 3. liaison officer is appointed  M.1.5. would like to have an opportunity of discussing toe points raised in this paper with him in detail and also to introduce him to the various officers in toe Department with whom he will have to deal., Register No. Minute Sheet No. NOTE FOR PnoS.  I spoke to Captain about the two Dutchmen who had been brought here for interrogation on 15th December  -.... . .  I  told h-im that they had been seen and could be taken out to-day.  I told him however that the procedure under which they were brought here was likely to lead to sense of grievance. They had already been in this country for about six weeks and had both said that they could not understand why it was only now at the end of their training that they had suddenly been sent for security examination. I asked to urge upon the Americans the desirability of sending aliens to the L.R.C. for examination at the earliest possible moment not only in the interests of security but also in the interests of the Organisation who were  to employ them.  Both men moreover had been told by the Americans that they would only stay at the L.R.C. for two days and so they expected to be out on Saturday. I asked m to tell the Americans not to malra any definite statements of this kind in future. While every endeavour would be made to release them as soon as possible nobody could foretell exactly how long the investigation would take. Moreover an examination carried on under a great sense of urgency was rarely effective.  B.1.d/L.R.C.  73.12.44. H.J.Baxter.   hjb/jb  [P.T.OVER.    23893 Wt.51405 5529 300 000 3/43 A. K.W.Ltd. Gp.698 J.5340 THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 KfQsf, s.1.50/Vl y4 ajd .B.  21st Decaaber 1944  Dear  31til reference to ffli'-letter of the 13tii Deeesiber I now enclose a copy of the paper waiefc 1 iiaTe prepared for 0.sl S. for your information. \  I will let you knos aa soon as I hear frctt that these proposals are agreeable to th a and once again many thanks for all your assistance in the matter.  fours sincerely.  T.A. Robertson  Lieut.-Colonel Captain  3.X.3 Tm/MM  1 enc  Y  THiS S A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. NOMr OOQ, TOP SEGRET Cfr  sf.5o/ 143 4 a.d.b.  21st December 1944  Dear Pearson  With reference to your letter of the 7th December in which you gave me your comments on the minutes which I drafted of our meeting on 15.11.44 I   ii x now enclose two copies of the  ' final paper which I hope you will find cowers all the points you made.  Perhaps you will let me know as soon as possible whether these proposals meet with your approval.  Yours sincerely  j A Robertson T.A. Robertson Norman Pearson  O.S.S. TAF MLM, S Is 'j oj k - 4 Secret la reply atato NTTMBEB and DATE. VS/ig/iv/A  dated 31.12. 44.  V.c. it   sV Dear Baxter  Would you very kindly refer to your 3.1.d/l C/SP.5l/ 32/19 1 dated 12.12.44. the last paragraph in particular. I have now received from the Americans a note in which they write as follows   In regard to your minute of 17.12.44. calling to our attention the increasing evidence of German pene tration into resistance organizations we are in agreement with your opinion that even the best accredited members of the resistance movement should be given a thorough examina tion before employment. Steps are being taken to guarantee that field stations and other branches in London fully appreciate these facts  I am sure you will be glad to hear that your remarks are really receiving serious attention from the Americans.  Tours sincerely.  THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED  M DEPARTMENT UNDER SEC i ION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. /XICW  Lt.-Colonel H.J. Baxter  L.a.c., HQ & HQ DETACHMENT OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES European Theater of Operations U.S. Army   MAIN  9 January 1945  Ref. SF.50/6/l43 4 A.D.B.  Dear Robertsons  In confirmation of our discussion of Friday last relative to the Proposal of the Measures to be Adopted by O.S.S. with Aliens Whom  They are Importing into the U.K. a attached to your letter referred above it is my understanding that th lowing minor changes in the text are agreeable to you Para II. For M.I.5 are prepared to accept as an accredited agent one who has been working for six months and is vouched for... .S read  M.I.5 are prepared to accept... or is vouched for... . In this con  nection it is agreed that X-2's assurance that the agent is accredited  will suffice and that in questions of vouching by the Chief of O.S.S. Mission in Paris or London a cable voucher will be acceptable to you.  Para III. After sentence 3 'the following sentence should be inserted  If by any chance an accredited agent should arouse suspicion Jn the part of // M.I.5 they will refer the matter of any investigation to O.S.S. before any undertaking of it.  It is agreed that it will be sufficient to instruct M.I.5 as to the date of departure of any accredited agent from the U.K. and that he is no longer within the U.K. but not the point or area of destination.  Para IV. For In the case of newly recruited agents... it would assist M.I.5 materially if as much warning and as many details as possible could be given about the agents before their arrival read In the case of newly recruited agents... it would assist M.I.5 materially if as much warning and as many details as possible could be given about the agents before their arrival at L.R.C.  This additional phrase will provide for a continuance of present practice by which incoming agents are given at least some time with O.S.S. personnel before being turned over to L.R.C. for interrogation. During this interim period which will be made as brief as possible full biographical data on the agents will be obtained if not already at hand and turned over to L.R.C. for preliminary cheeking an opportunity will be given to explain to the agents that their period at L.R.C. is to be understood as  routine O.S.S. procedure and O.S.S. personnel will be enabled to acquaint  themselves with the agents whom they will have to train after clearance by  L.R.C. During this interim period the agents will be confined in military areas or in local flats under constant surveillance as presently., -2-   Within sub-para 3 of Para IV the following sentence should be added to the present close If O.S.S. should rash to grant training other than parachute training to agents brought into the country without c  r security examination at L.R.C. O.S.S. may be submitting such agents to a cnAsK security examination at L.R.C. 'provide them with the same privileges as those for agents originally cleared by L.R.C. at their entrance to the  U.K.  Para VII. For ... the Home Office are prepared to intern a limited number in the Isle of Men... read ... the Home Office are prepared to intern a very limited number in the Isle of Man... .  You may wish to reissue the Proposal as an Agreement in line with the suggestions submitted above. It is our understending that if these changes are made the various concerned branches of O.S.S. are agreeable to its being immediately put into operation. I shall however wish to obtain their formal assent to the revised version.  Sincerely yours.  Norman H. Pearson Acting Chief X-2 Branch  Lt. Col T. A. Robertson  M.I.V., TOP SECRET  It is understood by t .1.3. that it will be necessary for tbe various deyai tiuerits of 0.3.3. responsible for recruiting and train ' log agents ror work in aaesKyoocupied territory to bring aliens to the lotted hiiigdom for training nd other purposes. Xt is felt that a simple and straightforward procedure should be laid down as between  0.5.3. end M.Iso that the following requirements cctaion to both parties can be not  a that an accredited agent can be brought into the country without arousing unnecessary suspicion by his method of entry   b that in the case of new agents recruited abroad a security check should be provided by means of the machin ery set up for the purpose at the L.H.C.   e that means for disposing of unsatisfactory agents should be provided so as to meet the requirements of the hone Office namely that no undesirable alien shall be set free in this country thereby constituting a menace to security   d that a focal point should be established in O.S.S. through which all matters of this nature os between 0.3.5. and K.I.5 can pass.  11.r Before putting forward suggestions for setting this machinery in motion it is necessary to define the term accredited agent. In our submission an accredited agent is an agent who has been proved by his work in the field to be reliable. M.1.5. are prepared to accept as an accredited agent one who has been working for six months or is vouched for in writing by the Chief of 0 3.5. mission in laris or London or in the absence of either of these officials whoever is acting for them at the time.  in. mmmw prior notification of the arrival in this country of an accredited agent should be given at me to . .1.5 who will take the necessary steps to have him landed at the port and see that he is not directed os he normally would be to the L.a.C. The department of 0 5.3. to whom the agent belongs will be responsible for his custody and good behaviour while in this country. If by any chance an accredited agent should arouse suspicion then 0.5.5. are entitled to approach M.I.3. and ask them to conduct a security investig ition of the agent. If by any chance an accredited agent should arouse suspicion on the part of 13.1. . they will refer the mutter of any investigation to 0.5.5. before any undertaking of it. k.X.3. would also like to be infomed about the departure from the United kingdom of all accredited agents., 2  iv. AiC M& Jz&LMwm9 x '.iJmii& n m mmMzn jsk&ms XL%&Mm jmm mx.jmi&   Xu the caae of aovjly raoruited agents brought into the United Kingdom fra abroad for the purpose of putting tkcst. tiirougi. extensive training courses. would like to have the chance of interrogatisg these at the L.H.C. where their stay will be kept as short as possible eonpatlble with the time taken to conduct a useful interro gation but it would assist h.Xo. materially if as K.uch warning and as mtiny details as possible could be given about the agents before their arrival at the L.h.C. This will not only ensure a more thorough exnmimtion of the agent but will also speed up the interrogation. Copies of these interrogation reports will be handed to c.c.s.  The purpose of this interrogation is two-foldi   a to satisfy the security arrangements of na .eiy to eiisur tiiat no German agents ore seat into this country through these channels and   b to assist 0 ii.s in determining whether the persons chosen are satisfactory from a security point of vie and to provide a security check against the penetration of their organisation by the Oexuun Intelligence service.  i .1.5 s e no objection to 0. .w. bringiig to this country for short training i.e. parachute training agents recruited abroad and allowing these agents to forego the security examination at the L.I .0. h.Io. would like to have the names of these agents their dates of arrival and dsporturs. It ia understood that in this particular ease there is no security danger from the Oki.-. point of view as the agents will be operating singly and will not be in a position to catpose other members of the O.ii.iS organisation. If C.r .h. should wish to grant training other than parachute tfai&ing to agents brought into the country without security estn&i&atian at the h d.C i 0. . . bo submitti% such agents to a secvanity exaelnatioii at the h.a.C. in order to provide thee with the awe privileges as those for agents originally cleared by the I.R.C. at their entrance to the U.K.  So far as agents of eneqy nationality are concerned k.1.3 ere anxious to have the opportunity of examining all these cases at the  L.H.C. as in other cases wisi. to have prior notification and particulars of any agents of enemy nationality who are brought to the united Kingdom fer any type of training. similarly .'-.1.3 would like to be notified of the departure of these agents from the United Kingdom VX. pi... os a yg. m&xriMAPmxm  LATICfK ALITYA In accordance with the re uireeents of the heme Office. i X 3 have undei tal. n to see that agents recruited for secret missions who prove during their training period to be unsuitable are not left at large in the United Kingdom. Xn such cases they must be returned, t  3 to their country of origin if tbia la possible. Xf however it  is impossible to return these agents to their countries of origin.  i' 1 would like to be consulted by O.S.S. in each case so that the eases can be dealt with on their merits as and when they arise.  VII. OF ukqatactohy Uii [ In the case of agents of enaay nationality who it is found impossible to return to their country of origin the home Office are prepared to intern a very limited number in the Isle of Man. until such time as it any be possible to dispose of then . /   W Vi4  VIII. wish to offer the maximum amount of assistance to O.- .h. in order to ensure that their operations are successful and that their organisations do not become penetrated with consequent disastrous results by the German Intelligence service. For this purpose they are willing and anxious to put their resources at the disposal of c.3.3. in an advisory capacity. .1.5. ore anxious to make it clear that they are not interested in finding out about or prying into the activities of O.S.S. secret organisations but on the other hand it will be appreciated that since M.I.5 are responsible for the security of the united kingdom they must therefore take every precaution to ensure that the enemy do not establish agents in the United kingdom by penetrating allied secret organisations operating inside enemy territory. I f. Finally fc.1.5 would like O.S S. to appoint an officer who would act as the sole link between mid the G.3.S. secret organisations. This officer will be put completely into the picture regarding .Io methods and will translate .1.5 s views sugges tions and opinions to other members of his organisation who are concerned with these activities., T  s.F.3Q/ /14y4 ii B  13tb January 1943  DearA   .\r S' With rsference to your letter dated tbe January I cow enclose two copies of the paper con cerning the aeasures to be adopted in dealing with aliens imported into this country which contains the various amendments agreed by us both.  I shall be glad to hear from you when you have obtained the formal assent to this document of the various branches of O.S.S. who are concerned.  Tours sincerely  T. A.. F cr T.A. Robertson  Lieut.-Colonel Norman H. Pearson Esq..  0 3.3.  2 eacss  TAR/MEK, s.F.50/6/143/4 ai b  13th January 1945-   My dear H J.  I am sending you herewith for your information a revise version of the document dealing with the importing of aliens into this country by O.S.3.  The amendments are in paragraph II III IV and VII and as soon as O.S.S. have given their formal assent to these proposals they will be put into effect.  Yours  r /   -j  T. . Robertson  Lieut.-Colonel Lt.-Col. H.J. Baxter L.B C  1 enc  TAi/MEM, 2l.  3.F.50-6-143 4 /A.D.3. THtS iS-A COPY j 1945. ORIGINAL DOCUMB T RETAM IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUpUQ'RECGRDb ACT 195S-. NO joO fry 3ear earson.  You asked me to let you have in written form the views which I expressed at yesterday's Easel A. meeting here as to the disposal of enemy nationals brought by O.S.3. to this country for training who prove unable or onsuitable to complete their courses.  What I said is really an expansion of paragraph 7 of the document sent to you by Colonel Robertson of this department in his letter of 13th January and amounts to this -   The Home Office are prepared though reluctantly to arrange for the internment in exceptional cases of a few German nationals brought here for training if and only if. there is a serious case against them personally on security grounds . The Horae Office would not I am afraid consider the internment f trainees against whose character or loyalty to our cause there is nothing to be said hut all that has happened is that some physical disability such as breaking his leg or inability to attain the required standard has made it impossible for him to continue his course or to be of use to your organisation. The very rainiraaim case which we could ask the Rome Office to deal with by way of internment would be one in widch the individual had been ggiy partiallytrained and acquired some secret information of importance bxHrwhere there was evidence that he would be likely to disclose this information in places more dangerous than an internment camp.  K.H. Pearson . 3sq. v.\  Q.3.S. /over, -2 -24th Januar / 1945.   H H. Pearson Sag .  and in some oases you may find it possible to send them home to the United States-   I hone that the natural reluctance of the Horae Office to' intern at this stage of the war persons against   whom individually there is nothing to be said Trill not in view q the alternatives suggested above cause you much difficulty.  I have written on similar lines to so far as this problem concerns his organisation.  Yours sincerely.  H.L.A. Hart ES/FW.  THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1P5S. NJcWd QO, EHEMY ALIENS BHOUGHT TO THE U.K. FOR TRAINING AG AGENTS BY SI.S.  OR O.S.S.  1. The British and American special services S.I.S. and 0.3.3. have asked for permission to bring to this country from the Continent German nationals for training as secret agents for use abroad. The Home Office consent to such persons being brought here only on the footing that their numbers are kept down to the absolute minimum required by the special services that no adequate facilities for training exist on the Continent that careful selection is made by the recruiting agency before any such persons are selected for training in the U.K. and that all such persons will return to the Continent as soon as possible 2. In order to minimise the risk that dangerous or undesirable enenr/ aliens may gain access to the U.K. as recruits for S.ILS. or O.S.S. all such recruits shall on arrival in the U.K. be sent to the L.R.C. for interrogation and security examination. During their stay at the L.R.C. the recruits shall be known and treated as stateless aliens and no distinction in treatment shall be made between them and other aliens ordinarily accommodated at the L.it.C. save that no charge in respect of them shall fall on the Welfare Fund. The investigation of such recruits at the L.R.C. shall be couvleted as speedily as possible. 3. If after interrogation at the L.R.C. no security objection is established to their admission to the U.K. such recruits shall be landed as German subjects conditionally on their reporting to the special service responsible for their recruitment. 4. Enemy aliens recruited from P/W camps in this country by S.I.S. or O.S.S. for training as agents shall not under any conditions go to the L.R.C. 5. S.I.S. and O.S.S. have enquired whether the Home Secretary would be prepared to make orders for the internment of any eneny alien recruited by them who is unable to complete his course of training. After consultation with the Home Office the Security Service has inforaed these agencies that the Home Secretary will not consider the internment of ary such persona unless there are genuine grounds for considering him a dangerous character from the securi4 ' noint of viewJ and that the mere j, -Page Two  fact that a recruit has acquired secret information in the course of his training hut has heen unable or is considered unfit to complete his course does not constitute adequate ground for internment. S.I.S. and  O.S.S. have also heen informed that in every case where a trainee is unable to complete his course of training O.S.S. and S.I.S. shall make special endeavours to procure his return to the Continent at the earliest possible opportunity. Any enemy aliens unable to complete their courses of training shall if they cannot he returned to the Continent hej  a enlisted in the pioneer Corps or other unit of the British Amy open to eneny aliens or h given alternative employment hy S.I.S. or O.S.S or c handed over to D.P.W for internment as a p/ff in cases where there is no security or other objection to this course or failing the above alternatives   d housed and maintained in premises under the control of S.I.S. or O.S.S. until return to the Continent is possible 6. Where any eneny alien partially trained by S.I.S. or O.S.S. is found to be dangerous from the security point of view the Security Service will submit his case for internment to the Home Office. If an order for internment is made in any such case the place of internment will either be an ordinary German internment camp in the Isle of Man or the Oratory Schools. No such internees can be accommodated either at Camp 020 or Ballaquane.  February 1945., In reply state NUMBER and DATE.  Secret. T5/L5/iv/A ed 2.2.45.  V.c. 4b cl 1 45 Dear & cter.  As you know I am now dealing with the cases of quite a number of O.S.3. agents and of course they wish to see the H.P.S. reports on these individuals.  There are two ways of solving the problem of ensuring that they do see these reports. The one we should prefer would be for you to mark the copy that you normally sent to Section V with the words 0.3.3. interest . The alternative which seems to us less advisable is that you should send an extra copy of the report but there is really little to be gained by the latter because we consider it better that the sub-section of Section Y should always see the report before it goes to the Americans in case the individual lias pre viously been tied-up with 3.1.3. and has made revelations of a nature which we should not wish to confide to the Americans. I can assure  you that there are quite reasonable grounds for this latter apprehension.  Would you very kindly let me know what you are able to  arrange.  xours sincerely.  Lt.-Colonel H. J. Baxter  L. R. C. ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAILED f IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS I [A6T 1958, ma/wrm/sp.50/6/143 4 5th Pehruaiy I945.  Dear  Thank you for your letter VSiA9/iViA e. of 2ad February referring to copies of Beporte on 0.3.S. Agents. I4y o ai view is that the better arrax aamt to adopt sould he far us to send you two copies of the Beport and for you to send one on to the Americana.  As you Know we are unbar an obligation to let the Afiericans hare copies of our Beporte on their Agents in accordance with one clause of the agreement recently made with them. I feel that this obligation would hardly be met iy sending one copy to you for you then to decide whether or not it should be shosn to tee Americans. Moreover I should have thought teat it wosaid hare been extremely inconvenient to you to have had only one copy for if you gave this one to the Americans you would have none left for your own records.  1'ours sincerely.  H.J. Baxter Lfc.Colonel CSapt.  S.I.3., In reply etats NUMBER and DATE.  Secret. 7S/19/ivA V.c. dated 2.2.45. Ch f Cd Deax-Colonel Adam You will recollect that at the conference held with 0.3.3. at which you and Robertson were present concerning the import and export of O.S.S. prospective agents it was agreed with the Americans that they should be allowed to retain certain individuals in custody they having been R.L.L. The Americans asked me recently whether in such cases it would be in order for an individual who had been so R.L.L. to move about in the streets in the custody of a U.3. Government official in civilian clothes holding an A.G.Q. card but not entitled to wear uniform and not a member of the Armed Forces. I replied that in probability I thought it most unwise but I raised the legal question 'with Hale who suggests that the Hone Office should be con sulted on the whole matter since without their agreement there is in fact no legal justification for the Americans exercising any form of custody on an individual who is physically on British territory whether or no he has been landed Hale suggested that 3.1.3. should raise the natter with the Home Office and obtain their agreement. I hope I am not being unduly optimistic if I suggest that in all probability we should all come off better if you con ferred with Perks on this matter and told him that you considered the procedure to be in the Allied interest. I submit also that it is not unreasonable fef ae suggest tMs for although you have it is true agreed to the system in order to help 0.3.3. and ourselves you are nevertheless the authority who decides what treatment an individual shall have on arrival. Would you very kindly let me know if you are able to help me out in this matter either by acting yourself or by giving me the benefit of your advice for you will be the first to agree with me that it is not always easy to persuade the Home Office to see our point of view. Tours sincerely., , B.1. VH735/SF.50/6/143 4 10thPehruaxy 1345 qjpf  p A f  Dear  Th nic you for your letter VS/19/ir/A T.c. of the 7tfa February referring to D.3.3. agents.  As you know in the past I have aXasys discouraged officers from making ary comment on the suitability of an alien for ffinploynsent as an agent on grounds other them security grounds although 1 am sell aware that from time to t±ae examiners have expressed their opinion about a man's character. If O.S.S. are anxious that in future we ahnulfl empress am opinion X am perfectly prepared to arrange that interrogators should do tills provided that it is veil  'erstood that ns are not experts in judgement of character nor m I we be aaqiraaaing an opinion within the ordinary scope of ourJ dxnm.es.  ' t re we express a view that a nan is unsuitable an security grounds then action sill bn taken ty Q.S.S. or youssedves in accordance with recent agreements. Share however ws merely express an t iaion of & man's suitability on other grounds presumably  0.3.3. mid yourselves will simply taka our opinion as yet another fact to be -fed aa into consideration in deciding whether to use the man as an agent. Yours sinoorely.  H.J.Baxter Lt.Colonel.  Gaptair  S.I.S. HJ3/3B, SiSG&iT SP.SO/6/143/VVAm 15 Feb 45 Dear  1S W  JJV  e are l.-Cari deal laitfa your V3/19/xr/ J.a. of 2 Feb 45 1 shall have i o 'zmxi whe'fcher fehe aliens in questicaa are SMies - allied or neutral.  Will you let use know the answer to this point  fours sincere3  C.H.3ume Lt. Qol.  for Colonel J.H.Adma. CHB/lO., In reply state BEB and DATE.  Secret. J  7.0. Dear Bume Replying to yoiu- .50/ lko yi/-\DD dated 13.2.45. the aliens in nuestion include both reniy -nil Allied natioiials.  -have not yet come across a case where 0. propose to eraoioy neutral out it woulcl not surprise me in the least if they did so. 'fhey certainly attempted to enroloy an individual who -ms bom in Kharkov on  18.10.24. and .vho therefore by all normal standards %Tould be considered a ooviet citizen though it would annear tl5 -.t one is only a. Soviet citizen provided L. ie ovieb a.uthc ri bxes say so irz esoective of when or where one was bon nd of what natronality one s parents T/ere. Tours sincerely. Lt.-Colonel 0 K. iume r. r. T /  THISISACOPY/ . rNnir'iM m nnr.i IMFNI RETAILED 4, , \ ' COPY riscinal in file for   c  V3/1 AS dated 17.2.45.  7.c. Dear Baxter  It is not without some misgivings that I send you a copy of a note which I have received from the Americans. The individuals mentioned in paragraphs 2 and 3 have been laid on with D4a who have been asked to ensure that only the names in which they are travelling i.e.. are men tioned either at the airport to the Immigration Officer or on their R.L.L. slips.  This obviously serves3 as it were to introduce paragraph 4 about which I confess I am extremely concerned. I am also surprised and -between ourselves -a little sceptical.  I do hope that you will be able to provide me with a satisfacotry answer to these expostulations. I feel justified in pointing out to you that I have been stern to-the Americans almost to the verge of rudeness in order to' keep them fully within the bounds of our own procedure with the L.H.C. as an institution.  Cbviously therefore if there is any truth in their present allegations my position becomes somewhat critical. I have not the slightest objection to being made to look stupid in my own. identity but I take veiy grave exception to being made to annear thus as a member of M.1.6.  I am sure you will help me to get over this difflenity.  Yours sincerely  signed 3.B.  It. Colonel H.J. Baxter  L.H.C. juijO iq a poPY  'V  ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. NcV/OoxocX, BP.50/6/145 4 .ADL4 17 Unr 45  r-  Dear Plcase refer to your 'I3t/\9/±v/A/'f.a. of 2 Feb 45. I tilink the Panel A meeting has perhaps made this question rather out of date. I have discussed the natter with the Hera Office and they are prepared to agree although they do not like the proposal and. wish it made subject to ary security objections so this really brings us back to the Panel A Meeting again. If there is anytiling further you m sh done will you let me know incidentally certain privileges have been given in this country to American Artaed Forces and we have been led to understand that AGO card was an 'indication that the individual was a raeoher of the Arasd Faroes. It is rather disturbing to find that AGO cards are issued on a widter basis. Tours sinnersIj -  Colonel. B. i TEA/hL., r -In reply state NUMBEB and DATE. f Secret. VSA9A8 dated 16.3.45. V.c. Dear Baxter We were speaking in the course of our telephone conversation of 15.3.45. of the machinery for sending the extra copy of reports on O.S.S. bodies. I have always wished as far sis possible to avoid having to deal with these reports and I have now received authority from my Chief to ask you to send them direct to O.S.S. They should be addressed to ITorman Pearson Esq. O.S.S. 14 Ryder Street and that will save I hope a considerable amount of time to O.S.S. and to me no little trouble. I also hope that it will make it easier for your machinery. The other copy of the report should of course now follow the normal channels of all R.V.P. S. reports which go to Section V and the special section who are concerned with the individual would then immediately contact O.S.S. if that should prove necessary. It will be helpful of course if you let me know what arrangements do suit you best. I very much hope it will be the above. Yours sincerely. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. tfj&LAs&ZL Lt.-Colonel H. J. Baxter L.R.C., 3.1 .&/RT3. SP. 50/6/143 4 26.3.45 Dear thaalc /ou far your letter af 16.3.45. W/19/4S.T.S. refarriag to copies of reports on O.S.S. agents at the L.B.G. I hat now ffiaae assszsgaaents that one oopj of the report shocla be sent to Section Y through the normal channels of H.Y.2VS. reparts ansi another copy will be sent direct to JSormn Bearsraa lours sincerely. II.J Barter Jjt.Odonel. V1', In reply state NUMBER 'E.  Secret.  SA9A8 dated 3.4.45. c. .. You are now very kindly providing an extra copy of R.V.P.S. reports on 0.3.3. individuals and sending it direct to than. They now ask whether it is possible to let them have two copies or even three. As far as I can make out it is possible to do six copies in one operation. I do riot know how many you require but 0.3.3. in their appeal say we are quite willing to take TTos.4 5 and 6 for 0.3.3. copies . If you can possibly help them we shall very much appreciate it and of course any extra copies you are able to provide should be sent direct to O.S.S. in accordance with current procedure. Yours sincerely. Lt.-Colonel H. J. Baxter L.R.C. THiS R A FnPV ORIGINAL boCUMENf'RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION, B 1.a/RVPS SF/i 0/6/143 4 5th April31945.  Bear  With reference to your letter V3/19A-3A c. dated 3 4 45 a referring to O.S.S. reports I haTO made arrange ments for two copies to be sent direct to Q.S.S. This is all that we can spare.  I an sure you will inpress upon  O.S.S. the need for seeing that full care is taken of both copies. Yours sincerely.  H.J.Baxter Lt.Colonel.  S.I.S. IJJB/JB - I M\ \l, Secret. In reply state NUMBER ii 7SA9A8 dated 13.4.45. Replying to your Bld/RVFS dated 7 4.43o herewith enclosed 0.8.S. cheque for 3.10.4. in your favour.  Would you very kittdly let me know that it has reached you safely. Tours sincerely Lt.-Colone1 H.J. Baxter L. R.0., 5  14th Awril 15 Tosari WlV/hS  e. Sear €a.ptaia. In the abaeaae ef CoIcjksI Bsxfesr  I wite ts aeiiTiesiedga the G.S.S eSsaqiaa for 3 10 4 enclosed iayour letter of 13th April  Tears sliacerely. S.J. Baxter l t.. OoloaeL  Gastaia i.l.maW IUU -WSg 8gg MW ° °  al11 - 1 ll I M II THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBL C RECORDS ACT 1958. rNiW CLipoO, SF.506/143 4 Y.ADD4 4tii May 1945  Dear  There is a recognised definition of an accredited agent and this implies due check on the bona fides so that there is no risk in waiving the usual predautions on entry and departure from the TJ.K.  It is also agreed that certain individuals may be treated exceptionally as accredited agents on the certificate of Colonel Dansey.  I understand that O.S.S. accredited agents are duly cleared from a security point of view from our records. There remains the question of authorising certain individuals to be treated as accredited agents. It is important that this should only be on a high level and as these special cases may have political or other repercussions I think Colonel Dansey should be consulted and approve them before we accept them.  Can you let me have your views on this.  Yours sincerely   Signed J.H.Adam Colonel Capt.  3.I.S, -yw  In reply state NUMBER and  Secret. VS/19/48 dated 12.5.45. Dear Adai Please-refer to your SF.50/6/143/4/Y.ADD4 dated 4th May /1945. You will remember that the whole of this matter was fully discussed between representatives of O.S.S. M.I.5. and us at Ryder Street on 15.14.44. The draft of the definition of an accredited agent which we received un der reference SF.50/6/143/4/A. dated 21.12.44. was as follows 'V \ V's  Before putting forward suggestions for setting this machinery in motion it is neces sary to define the term 'accredited agent'.  In our submission an accredited agent is an agent who has been proved by his work in the field to be reliable. M.I.5. are prepared to accept as an accredited agent one who has been working for six months and is vouched for in writing by the Chief of O.S.S. Mission in Paris or in London or in the absence of either of these officials whoever is acting for them at the time.  During the discussion of this particular paragraph you will remember it was agreed that S.I.S. could not possibly undertake the responsibility for deciding the rights and wrongs of a certificate given by O.S.S. that an individual was an accredited agent. This is still the position. If you consider that the position with regard to the certificates given in writing by the Chief of the O.S.S. Mission in Paris or London should now be reconsidered may I suggest that we should have a further discussion with O.S.S. and yourselves. Yours sincerely. Colonel J.H. Adam ijh' lo K tri  M.I.5.  '7, Secret. In reply state NUMBER and DATE. VS/I9A8 dP.ted 24.5.45. V.c. Desr Colonel Adam The arrangements which you very Vindly maae concftming the bringing hack to this country of aliens employed by 0.S.8. who had oreviousl] -been here either demobilised or as refugees were duly passed on to O.S.S. and I have now received from Foman Pearson a note which reads as follows  With reference to your memorandum to me regarding the present arrangements for returning to the TT.K of aliens who have been enployed by O.S.S. and who w re residents here may I express to you and through you to the Pome Office my personal thanks for your courtesy and understanding in the matter. We are most grateful for yoxir efforts on this score . I feel that you certainly ought to see it and leave it to you to decide whether you will nass it on to Prestige. I would add that I myself am also very grateful. T feel that it would have been extremely shabby to have.tfoe rto get rid of aliens who left the country simply because they were prepared to work for the Allied Cause and in any case I am nuite sure that without the arrangements made by you the mericans would have returned to the charge in many ways and I should have had endless bother. Tours sincerely Colonel J. H. Adam C.I.E. O.B.E. M.I.5., 5F.50/6/143 4 3U D4. 29th &ay X945.  Dear Vivian  Please refer to your VS/19/48 of 12.5.45.  She difficulty arises over the last phrase or in the absence of these officials whoever is acting x'or them at-the time . In the case of .1.6. there is one officer but the alternative for 0.6 6. is much wider and there sight easily be an officer sanctioning this special procedure who was not fully acquainted with all the considerations involved. this sight lead to action which would be deprecated by S.I.6. as such as by ourselves.  Circumstances have changed since ay letter to Cdpt.   i of 4th May. I take it there is now no necessity for the introduction of such special people by G.S.S. and consequently there is no need to have further discussion of the subject.  Yours sincerely.  J.E. Adam Colonel. Colonel Vivian  O TC W 4 Jkt 41 W THisTs A COPY  ORIGINAL DOCUMENT REWED IN DEPARTMENT WDcR oEC UoN 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDb ] ACT 1958., Register No. Minute Sheet No. 1. 14.11 44. Minute between MI5/War Room/6 & A.coming to U.K. from continent la. E. 15.11.44. Draft Report on Meeting held 15 11.44. procedure adopted by S.A.A. when bringing agents to U.K. from abroad. 2a. THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION  3. 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS Ar.T bTi-wf -CLcjoO 18.11.44. From Lt. Winston Scott O.S.S. -Minutes held on 15.11.44. re Handling of Agents. 3a. 4. 18.11.44. Minute between ADiD.4. & A.D.B. -comments on Par.9. of 2a. 4a. 5. 23.11.44. / 23.11.44. To Captain S.I.S. enclosing copy of 2a with5a. 6a.  22793 Wt.88206/ 4997 200 000 10/42 A.St H.W.Ltd. Gp.698 J.6613 [P. T. Over., 7  23.11.44. To Mr. Pearson O.S.S. enclosing copies of 2a & 5a. 7a. 8. 23.11.44. 28.11.44. Extract from Minute between PS/DG & ADD re discussion with Home Office concerning Enemy Aliens training as Agents with S.I.S. S.O.E. & O.S.S. A.D.D.4 Note on 3a. 8a. 8b 9. 29.ll.44 From S.I.S. in reply to 6a. a. 10  7.12.44. From O.S.S. commenting on the draft minutes circulated by M.I.5. loa as at 2a. 11  11a.   8.12.44. From S.I.S.1 enclosing 10a. 10.12.44. Frcm S.I.S. to L.K.C. re side-door interrogation for O.S.S.Agents. llb. 12.12.44. To S.I.S. in reply to lib. llc 12   I9.i2.44. To S.I.S. in replfc to 11a and stating that final paper is being l a prepared.  12b.   14.12.44. From S.I.S. to L.R.C re llo. 13  12.44. Final paper concerning measures to be adopted by O.S.S. in dealing 13a with aliens whom they are importing into the U.K. 18.12.44. B.l.D Mote re conversation with S.I.S. re two Dutchmen. 13b 14  21.1 .44. To S.I.S. enclosing for information copy of 13a. 14a  13 . ' 21.12.44 To O.S.S. enclosing two copies of 13a for agreement. 15a, Register No. SP 50/ /143 4 Minute Sheet No. 16.  . A.D.B Lt Colonel Robertson   -  I have no comments to make on 13a .  23.12.44. H.J. Baxter. 31.12.44. Prom S.I.S. to L.R.O. referring to llo. 16b. 17 Mote I have discussed 13a with Norman Pearson Head of O.S.S X-2 . He has only Very few amendments to make alter consultation with the other interested O.S.S. Departments. These he will be sending to me in the course of the next few days. I have asked him to insert an amenoment in paragraph ft namely the word very in between a and  limited1'. A.D.B T.A. ftbbertson. 6.1.4b ia 9. 1.45. From O.S.S. Mr. Pearson suggesting additional amendments to 13a. Iba 19 1.43. Final paper on measures to be adopted by O.S.S. in dealing with 19a Aliens whom they are importing into the U.K. 20  13.1.4J3. T° O.S.S. M . Pearson enclosing two copies of 19a. 20a 21  13.1.45. To L.R.C. Col. Baxter enclosing a copy of 19a for information. 21a n. b tv V. Afzu f j fA  sf o i 61 ihaJ ft.' f S' as 's/' 0  r\ 7 4 C-UxxjlJ 4.  -aT '/a-pAV'.  .12255/3290 200 000 A.& E.W.Ltd. Gp.698 .1.5613 [P.T. Over.   24291 Wt.12265/3290 6/48, 23  24.1.45. To O.S.3. re treatment of trainees of German are unable to complete their courses. 23  24. 5.2 45. Note on procedure for dealing with enemy aliens TJ.K. for training as agents by S.I.S. or O.S.S. original in S.F 51-32-19 5 24a  5 Feb 5 From Capt. re. procedure for dealing with  25a   OSS prospreotive agents  5.2.45. To S.I.S. in reply to 25a.  25 26  5 Feb 45 From S.I.S. re import and export of OSS prospective agents 26  B Fob 15 Fr'-r w T 4-n iwntaj a. t y 26   nnnmHng dnnnmwni.t  8.2.45. From S.I.S. in reply to 25b.  T rTeXcOPY  27  10.2.45. To S.I.S. in reply to 26b.  3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 1 ' 1958. J 12 Feb 45 To Capt. re. 26a .27  28  15 Feb 45 To Capt. re 25a 28a  29. A copy of 24a was handed to representatives of O.S.S. by  A.D.B. on 14.2.45. A.D.B. 15.2.45., Reference...  MINUTE SHEET. 16.2.45. 30 16. 2.45. From Capt. . Co y of letter to Capt. in reply to 28a re identity of OSS agents 30a. at L.E.C. 30b. 17.2.45. Dopy of letter to L. E. C. from re 30b. 3003 i K IK  xfJx 32 A D.D. 4 With reference to Minute 31 1 spoke to Mr Prestige on this matter when I was at the Old Bailey on the 26th inst. and he said that he reluctantly agrees to the proposal put forward in the second paragraph of 26a unless it is felt by Col.Adam that the Security risk overrides the operational requirements. X D. 4 a. 27.2.45. wsm/jt. 33 THIS IS A COPY 17 Mar 45 To S.I.S. in reply to 26a ORIGINAL D0CUMENI RE FAINED 33a IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958. /vtX SUbkX 34a  From S.I.S. re reports on O.S.S. Bodies  17.3.45. 35. 35a  5Eo S.I.S. in reply to 34a  26.3.45. 36. 3.4.45. rom 3.I.8.re O.S.S.Bodiea 36a 37. 5.4.45. To S.I.3.referring to 36a. 37a  I609 23796/I381 2 050 000 8/40 JC&SLtJ Gp644/229  REOIMINT CODE 5-34 0  [OVER, 14.4.45. Prom 8.1.3. enclosing cheque from 083 38a 39. 14-4 45. To 3.i.3. acknowledging 38a. 39a  4.5.45. 40. To s.i.s. re travel of accredited agents 40a 14 May 45 41 Prom S.I.S. in reply to 40a 41a 25 May 45 42 Prom S.I.S. re arrangements for bringing back Employees of 8.S.S. to UK To S.I.8 In r-e ly to 5.5.61. Note for file. 44a.]