[S.O.&   FILE NUMBER SUBJECT SOE HISTORY 39 DIRECTORATE OF SECURITY CO-ORDINATION IN AMERICA VOLUME FROM -]g42 TO, THE ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958., PART II  S1GWRIT, CONTENTS  Page No.  1. History  1. Fomation andGrowth... 1  2. Consular Security Organization.. 2  3. Later Developments. 3  4. Reorganization. 5  11. Activities  1. Section A.l Liaison with U.S. and Canadian Authorities ..... 6  2. Section A.2 Personnel Investigation -British Missions ... 6  3. Section B.l Consular Security Organization in U.S. ........ 6  4. Section B.2 Consular Security Officers in SouthAmerica ... 8  5. Section C Coordination .. 11  6. Section D.l Labour and Communist Activities ... 12  7. Section D.2 Reporting . 12  8. Section D.T. A.l Dock Fire Inspection .. 13  9. Section D.T. A.2 Factory Security ...... 14  10. Section D.T. A.4 Credit Investigations . 15  11. Section D.T. A.5 Investigation of Personnel for Allied ArmedForces .. 15  DIAGRAM  Facing Page  Dollar Expenditure  Month of March 1942 12, 1. HISTORY Formation -and Growth. The development of a separate Security Division in the 48000 organisation was dictated by the presence in the United States of the British Purchasing Commission and other British Missions interested in supplies of vital war material. The British Purchasing Commission originally possessed a Security Officer in the person of iwho by the time 48OOO arrived in the summer of 1940 had already effected some useful measures in respect of the internal security of the Commission and also in respect of the numerous American factories which were then engaged in filling British orders. At the beginning of December 1940 was transferred to Bermuda as 48000 s representative and his place in the Purchasing Commission was taken by working directly under the orders of 48000. This arrangement was made possible through the cooperation of the late Arthur Purvis Director-General of the Commission who provided and his staff with space in the Commission's premises at 15 Broad Street New York. This arrangement was designed to promote-the undertaking which now fell to 48000 of coordinating such measures of security as were necessary to protect British interests and property in the United States including shipping in American ports. On January 30 1941 Lord Halifax who had just arrived in Washington as H. M. Ambassador formally advised H. M. Consulates and other British Missions that 48OOO would in future be known as Director of Security Coordination in the United States at the same time the State Department was officially informed of the appointment which was accepted. The following sections each headed by a competent officer recruited locally were accordingly inaugurated Internal Security Port Security Factory Security Investigation of Recruits for R.A.F. Civilian Technical Cofps Doctors etc. Credit Investigation of factories and individuals seeking British contracts. THIS IS A COPY noiftIMAi nnmiMFMT RFTAINEn, By the Spring of 1941 some measure of success was being achieved in co-ordinating the various security problems. On a perfectly open basis contacts had been secured with various U. S. government agencies such as the Office of Naval Intelligence Military Intelligence G2 Coast Guard the New York Police Force Bomb and Arson squad. Alien investigation the  U. S. Immigration Department the Treasury Department etc. In nearly all instances the first approach had been made by the U. S. departments themselves. In addition having the backing of the British Purchasing Commission it was possible for the Security Division to tap sources of infomation and make contacts with a large number of productive indirtduals and concerns such as banks credit bureaus engineering firms international corporations in almost every field of production and to secure from them either conscious or unconscious co-operation. Because the ever increasing activities of the Security Division were ostensibly for the protection of British contracts and commitments the possibility of accusations that British Secret Intelligence operations were becoming increasingly active in the U. S. was greatly minimized. Consular Security Organization.  During January 1941 in view of the unsatisfactory conditions of Port Security in New York City it became advisable to organize a nationwide Port Security system which would cover all ports where British or Allied vessels called. In conjunction with the Embassy D.N.I. Ottawa and various authorities in London sanction was secured to build such an organisation to become a section of the Security Division. During February the first appointments of Consular Security Officers were made and by March the field organisation was virtually complete. In almost every instance it was possible to secure a British subject who had long been resident in the port in which he was to serve and who had had in the past considerable commercial shipping experience.  Ely June 1941 the Consular Security Organization in the U.S.A. had proved its value. Numerous problems of ships' crew mostly among Allied and Chinese crews inspired by enemy activities had been settled or  thwarted by prompt action and co-operation with the Ministry of War Transport both in New York and Washington the Maritime Commission and various U. S., government departments. Suspicious waterfront characters and establishments had been Identified and necessary repressive action taken. In the process of achieving this very considerable good will had been created between British and U. S. officials masters and crews and the general public. It was therefore suggested to the Security Executive in London that it would be advisable to extend the C.S.O. organization throughout South America. A plan was drawn up the vital ports selected and it was decided that who had previous experience of South American conditions and who had in addition been working for several months in the Security Division on problems connected with ships' crews should undertake the organising tour.   accompanied by another officer toured the South American continent by air from mid-August to mid-October 1941 and successfully appointed Consular Security Officers in twenty-six ports. During this journey special stress was placed on the examination of security conditions in the Venezuelan and Colombian oil fields and incidentally in British Guiana on the subject of bauxite shipments. It may be added that at this stage the entire C.S.O. organisation was placed on a better footing with the Naval Reporting Officers organisation which came under the command of C.-in-C. America West Indies Station .  Later Developments During the year 1941 the Security Division grew from the smallest beginnings to a headquarters organisation of about 65 in addition to some 50 more in the field.  The first six months of 1941 will be remembered in the U.S.A. as a period of constant strife and strikes in heavy industries and considerable anti-British agitation among maritime workers and on the waterfront. This appeared to be a concerted move to strangle the American war effort on Britain's behalf. The very considerable study that had been made by the Security Division of disturbing elements in industry and on the  waterfront among crew members and especially among the Communist Party was at this time of considerable value to the numerous U. S. authorities who were greatly concerned at this outburst of obstructionism. While only a few cases of minor sabotage occurred the general disruption of American industry was probably the greatest single act of prepared sabotage that has ever occurred. The fact that the Security Division had very   /  THIS IS A COPY H ORIGINAL document retained IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS, early started to make a continuing study of subversive individuals and elements proved a valuable asset in dealing with the outbreaks after they occurred.  -I I   Upon the entry of the U.S.A. in the war there was an almost hysterical tightening up of security measures everywhere throughout the country. Certain policing and supervision which had previously been under taken or inspired by the Security Division were of course taken over by the appropriate U. S. authority. While these authorities disposed of numbers of staff far in excess of any that the Security Division could ever have had available on the other hand the U. S. authorities were completely inexperienced and guileless as to how security should be organized and implemented. Thus while certain activities in the field greatly decreased the Security Division having been the pioneer found itself increasingly involved with the laying down of security policy and rendering technical advice as to how security measures could be best achieved. Today a very close liaison exists with all U. S. civilian departments the Army and the  Navy and their subsidiary organizations on all matters concerned with  security. It can be safely stated that few major decisions regarding the installation or organization of security are taken without the help and advice of Security Co-ordination. This has naturally enabled the Director to suggest many measures which although controlled and undertaken by the  U. S. authorities almost wholly benefit British interests. A notable example is the very special guard and police arrangements now made whenever an important troop transport calls at a U. S. port. The system in use today is one developed by the C.S.O. organization to guard the Queen Elizabeth on one of her early calls in San Francisco THIS IS A COPY 4AL DOCUMENT RETAINED ', 5. 4 Reorganization. Hitherto all communications from the Security Division in the shape of telegrams and reports had been routed to S.I.S. Headquarters in London although the majority of them were subsequently re-routed to the Office of the Security Executive. It was to relieve London Headquarters of the pressure involved in acting as a channel for conununications which were not of immediate S.I.S. interest that it was arranged early in 1942 that the Directorate of Security Co-ordination should have direct access in the shape of communications to the Security Executive in London. Communications now exist by this new method on all subjects covered by the Security Division of Security Co-ordination except a enemy espionage and sabotage and b Communism and Labour Intelligence reports which it was agreed should continue to be routed through the old channel. This arrangement has been in effect since April 19 1942., 6. II. ACTIVITIES. The staff of the Security Division numbers sixty-eight employees in New York two in Washington twenty-five Consular Security Officers and their assistants in U.S. ports thirty-two Consular Security Officers and assistants in South American ports making a total of 127 employees.  Under the direction of the Division operates in Sections as described below  1. Section A.l. Liaison with U.S. and Canadian Authorities. This Section is primarily the liaison on all routine matters including S.I.S. between Security Co-ordination and some twenty American and Canadian law enforeement agencies including the F.B.I. the E.C.M.P. various City and State Police Departments the U.S. and Canadian Immigration Services the U.S. Treasury the Director of Internment Operations the local offices of U.S. Naval Military and Air Intelligence etc. The work of this Section prior to the U.S. entry in the war consisted mainly in securing semi-confidential and secret intelligence information and securing co-operation from the appropriate departments to obtain information or action required by Security Co-ordination. Since the end of 1941 the liaison has become extremely close with all U.S. departments and the painstaking efforts of the previous months to secure open-minded and openhanded collaboration have borne fruit.  2. Section A.2. Personnel Investigation British Missions . Investigation of all prospective employees by British Missions in New York and Washington is undertaken by this section for the benefit of the Missions.  3. Section B.l. Consular Security Organisation i. Functions. This Section acts as the co-ordinating unit for all Consular Security Officers in North America. These C.S.O.'s are stationed in fourteen U.S. ports. With the exception of New York where the C.S.O. has three assistants there is only one man in each port. The Section is in direct control of all the C.S.O.'s in the above ports. Their reports are sent to New York and thence to London or to the requisite U.S. authorities. Close contact is also kept with the various Consulates in which C.S.O.'s are stationed these officers being under the local jurisdiction for administrative and official reasons of their Consuls. In fact however their instructions all are sent from New York., 7  ii. Official U.S. Liaison. -For some time this Section has been the official liaison agency with the U.S. Haval Intelligence Office of the 3rd. Naval District New York. In addition with the U.S. entry into the war contact has been made and kept with the U.S. Coast Guard in New York and as special occasions have made necessary with the Headquarters of the U.S. Am y 2nd Corps Area and the New York Metropolitan Military District. Other U.S. Official contacts maintained by the section are the U.S. Customs U.S. Immigration both of New York as well as new Security bodies both in New York City and elsewhere which have arisen since the U.S.A. entered  the war.  iii. Liaison with British Missions. This Section has an official contact with D.N.I. Ottawa. Contacts are also maintained with the following  Australian Naval Attache Washington D.C. British Army Staff Q.M.G. Branch Movements New York. British Routing Office New York. British Naval Liaison Officer New York Navy Yard. Defence Equipment Merchant Shipping etc.  These are in addition to the main contact of all which is of course with  the many officials in the office of the Representative in the U.S.A. of the  Ministry of War Transport.  Other British contacts are  British National Union of Seamen New York Shipping Federation Ltd. New York International Mercantile Marine Officers Association N.Y. British Merchant Shipping Mission Washington D.C.  iv. Allied Liaison. Section B.l acts as a channel through which the names of deserting seamen are forwarded to the various non-American Allied Consulates in New York. In addition to these contacts are kept with the following Norwegian Trade & Shipping Mission  Netherlands Shipping Committee  International Transport Workers Federation  Dutch Central Transport Workers Union  Norwegian Seamen s Union  v. Adjustments Necessitated by U.S. entry inbo the war. With the entry of the U.S.A. into the war and especially since by Presidential Order the U.S. Secretary of the Navy and the U.S. Coast Guard were made responsible for port security the position of Security Division and the C.S.O. organization in the U.S.A. has been strengthened. This is largely due to the expressed desire of, 8  the U.S. authorities concerned that Security Co-ordination continue to look  after British and Allied Ships under charter to the Ministry of War Transport. In short the Security Division which had to operate more or less unofficially before December 1941 although with the tacit consent of the  U.S. authorities is now able to operate officially and to make and maintain official contacts with U.S. authorities. vi. Present Functions. It should be emphasized that this Section and all Consular Security Officers under its control have no work of an Intelligence nature. Duties consist of physical security measures for ships in port anti sabotage precautions welfare of officers and cfew and assistance in most ports to the Consuls General in crew problems. All undercover work was discontinued some months ago and one of the strictest injunctions to C.S.O.'s is that they are not to become involved in any way with intelligence work of an undercover nature. 4. Section B.2. Consular Security Officers in South America. i. Functions. The functions of the C.S.O.'s in South America of necessity differ considerably from those of the C.S.O. s in U.S. ports. As in the U.S.A. all C.S.O.'s are British subjects selected for their knowledge of local conditions and languages and their shipping experience. The ports in which they serve handle more than 80 of the British and Allied shipping volume in South America. The primary task of these C.S.O.'s was the provision of new or revised Anti-Sabotage regulations for the ports in which they were stationed. In addition they maintain liaison with various authorities officials and organizations such as  British Consular and Diplomatic authorities Local Allied Consuls British Naval Organization Local S.I.S. representatives Local Government Customs Police Army and Navy authorities etc.  In every case the Anti-Sabotage Regulations were evolved in collaboration with the local British and Allied Consuls the Shipping Agents of the Port and the local Authorities. The task of getting these Regulations agreed to by all the different Authorities involved was a long and arduous one. It was found necessary to reconcile the numerous conflicting interests and claims existing between all the many and varied Government Departments Consuls Commercial interests etc. concerned with Shipping matters. In every Port the Regulations were adopted and amplified to meet the particular dangers and conditions which existed, existed and which differ widely from country to country and from port to port in South America.  The task of maintaining and supervising the enforcement of these Regulations is a continuing and in some of the larger Ports a full-time job. New problems caused by the changing conditions of the war are constantly arising and must be met and overcome. Each C.S.O is consistently engaged in endeavouring to raise the standard of Shipping Security conditions in his Port -a continuing and neverending task.  At the same time the work being done automatically produces as a sort of by-product a steady flow of information and intelligence of a widely diversified character. This is passed to New York where it is given appropriate distribution either to British Missions in the U.S. or to local U.S. Authorities or else to the appropriate Departments of State and Ministries in the U.K.  All the C.S.O. s may make local distribution which includes the Naval Staff Officer Intelligence in their area the local S.I.S. or S.O.E. Representative  or Agent the local British Consul and Representative the local N.R.Q the local  U.S. Naval Observer the local Representative of the Ministry of War Transport or D.E.M.S. Officer etc. etc. ii. General Activities. The work of the C.S.O. s in South America falls into three main divisions  a Physical Security of Shipping and dock areas  b Welfare of crews  c Wateffront Intelligence work. Examples of all three of the above will be found in the following special cases.   1 The C.S.O. s at several Ports have played a leading part in the establishment of volunteer patrols for British and Allied vessels organized from amongst the ranks of the British and Allied communities in their areas  e.g. Montevideo Rio Grande do Sul Bahia .  2 The C.S.O. at Maracaibo Venezuela succeeded in having a standard set of anti-sabotage precautions adopted for the three Lake Tanker Fleets of the, three major oil companies operating in Venezuela viz. Shell Standard and Gulf.   3 Seamen's Welfare improvements too numerous to mention have been effected by the C.S.O.'s in South America.  4 The C.S.O.'s in nearly every Port have obtained improvement in the Security of information regarding Shipping movements in their area. Indiscreet cables sent and received by Agents and consignees have been reported to New York and satisfactory action obtained. Local Governmental Regulations necessitating public disclosure of arrivals and departures of vessels have in many cases been altered or revoked at the instance of the C.S.O. Many pro-Axis Captains of the Ports and Maritime Police Officials have been removed through the efforts and reports of C.S.O's.  5 In the vital and important Port of Buenos Aires the C.S.O. played a leading part in obtaining the provision of armed Argentinian Maritime Police guards for all British and Allied vessels in the Port.  6 In Rio de Janeiro the C.S.O. supervises a special Corps of Consular Ships' Watchmen. Member of this Corps when they can be spared are borrowed by the local U.S. Shipping Security Officer to guard U.S. Merchant vessels. iii Adjustments Necessitated by U.S. Entry into the War. The main effect of the U.S. entry into the war upon the C.S.O. in South America has been the necessity of integrating the activities of these Officers with the U.S. Naval Officers who are being appointed to safeguard the Security of U.S.-flag vessels in the Ports of South America.  iv. The Jamaica Intelligence and Security Conference. Negotiations were entered into in a Conference held in Jamaica during February 1942 and attended by 4896O between Representatives of the U.S. Office of Naval Intelligence and British Naval and Security Representatives towards establishing joint Shipping Security arrangements. As a result of the resolutions adopted at this Conference subsequently ratified by the Admiralty and the U.S. Navy Department mechanisms are now being set up which provide for the fullest collaboratioh and mutual assistance between British and U.S. Officials charged with obtaining adequate Security measures for United Nations Merchant vessels in South America. v. Current Activities. Under the terms of the Rio de Janeiro Agreement a Pan-American Conference has been summoned to convene in Montevideo to consider Inter-American Shipping Problems. The U.S.A. Representative to this Conference, 11. has requested the Security Division to supply him with all desirable recommendations for the improvement of Shipping Security conditions in the various South American Republics for placing before this Shipping Conference.  An obvious step towards the attainment of a greater degree of Security for United Nations Merchant Shipping lies in the adoption of a satisfactory Standard set of Anti-Sabotage Precautions applicable to all United Nations vessels trading to the Ports of South America. Towards the attainment of this end this Section has over a period of months and drawing on the experience of the thirty-two officers under its control evolved such a set of Standard Precautions. In it are embodied the bulk of the Precautions conmohly found necessary in the Ports of the Americas together with all the measures called for in the various directions and instructions issued by the Admiralty the Ministry of War Transport and the Foreign Office since the commencement of the Yfar. At the date of this report this Standard set of Anti-Sabotage Precautions has been accepted and endorsed without alteration by the Admiralty the Ministry of War Transport and the Foreign Office euid the Security Division New York has been requested to distribute printed supplies to the British Naval and Consular Authorities throughout South America.  These Standard Precautions are now under consideration by the U.S. Navy Department with a view to their possible extension to the U.S. Merchant Marine trading to South America.  5. Section C. Co-ordination. This Section deals with routine managerial duties of the office concerning staff salaries and finance as well as the co-ordination of the work of the different Sections particularly in dealings with the Purchasing Commission the Embassy and other British Missions. In addition this Section deals with special enquiries and requests submitted by the Embassy the Consulate-General the Purchasing Commission. Enquiries regarding the commercial standing and political sympathies of all firms or individuals seeking to do business with the Purchasing Commission or other Missions are also handled by this Section Details of financial expenditure  are set out in the accompanying Diagram., Source of Security Division Dollar as Expended -month of March 1942  Total Portion of Funds Provided by S.I.S. Portion of Funds Provided by B.P.C.  17 250 12 250 58i 4l Total Security Division Expenditures t 29 500 100, 12  6. Section D.l. Labour cjtu Communist Activities. This Section is responsible for watching Labour Communist and other subversive activities as they affect the interests of Security. In the past prior to February 1942 a number of undercover agents were employed in the above fields. More recently greater emphasis has been placed on Communist activities in the entire Western Hemisphere while activities on U.S. labour matters have been reduced since it is felt that this is more of an American domestic problem than before. However interest is still being maintained in Labour movements which show Radical  or more generally political influences.  While the above work has considerable current interest and interlocks with certain S.I.S. activities its chief value is on a long-range basis. In agreement with the Security Executive London a continuing study is therefore being made of all Labour activities and personalities which may be expected to create agitation both here and in the U.K. in the period of post-war re-adjustment.  In addition this Section maintains liaison with various U.S. Departments  military/ and Naval Intelligence Immigration concerning labour problems exchanging information and views.  7. Section D.2. Resorting. This Section is responsible for the preparation of all reports to the Security Executive London and also distributes to other agencies in the Western Hemisphere. In addition this Section prepares reports particularly on some aspects of Communist and Labour activities which are transmitted through S.I.S. channels. This Section also collaborates closely with the previous Section described above on the above subjects since the preparation of these reports requires exhaustive research and documentation. Regular monthly reports on Labour Conditions and Sabotage Activities are also compiled and transmitted both to London and local departments. Since April 1941 a-total of some 1200 reports have be n prepared many of them major studies of important issues such as U.S. Automobile Industry Relations between A.F.L. and C.I.O. Greek Maritime Situation Security in Venezuelan Oil-ports Daily Worker attitude to Great Britain Submarine Refuelling in Southern Caribbean etc. In addition this Section maintains for reference a master index of all cases of plant and shipping accidents  and sabotage reported in the U.S.A., 13  8. Section D.T. A.l. Dock Fire Inspection. Prior to December 7 1941j this section undertook a 24 hour inspection of .. 11 railroad yards terminals and deep-sea piers. Its primary establish and maintain liaison with the proper U.S. Authorities to watch for careless handling of Purchasing Conmission materials for laxity in police and fire protection and to ake steps to have these corrected. To this end contacts were made and maintained with Police Fire Coast Guard Dock and Army and Navy agencies in New York City and the neighbouring states.  At the request of other sections of Security Co-ordination special investigations and inspections were carried out at various manufacturing plants and recommendations submitted for Fire Police and A.R.P. protection. Other investigations dealt with non-delivery of goods and their inadequate protection in transit. Finally a survey was made and basic reports compiled concerning fire protection on all railroad terminals and deep-sea piers where Lend-Lease and Purchasing Commission materials were handled in transit. The responsible authorities were approached where protection was found inadequate and their aid enlisted.  With the advent of the United States into the War it was very clear that in due course the American Authorities would eventually assume active security control of railroad terminals and wateffront property. The first step in this direction took place in February 1942 when U.S. Naval Intelligence assumed responsibility for the security of all railroads. As a result of these changes the personnel of this section was re-organized and reduced from 18 employees to . and later to 4 In spite of this severe limitation of staff the connections previ usly made with the American Authorities have been maintained. The duties of the present staff have been staggered so that every pier is visited at least once during daylight hours. It has proved impossible to continue regular night duties but special assignments are made throughout the 24 hours when required. In this way the entire waterfront of New York Brooklyn Staten Island Jersey City and Hoboken N.J. is kept continually under observation., H. 9. Section D.T. A.2. Factory Security. Early in 1941 this Section had completed a survey of all British contracts placed with U.S. factories and the security conditions prevailing in the plants. A continuing effort ensued during the following nine months to make these factories Security-minded. With the passage of the Lease-Lend Act and the increasing production programme for the U.S. armed forces the War Department Internal Security Division expanded and started close liaison. By September the security position in plants had improved and it was recognized that with the maintenance of complete plant protection divisions in each U.S. Procurement District Branch Office staffed by commissioned officers and qualified investigators it would not be advisable to have a separate Security Division organization in the field. With the object of economy and to avoid duplication of work it appeared better to establish close relations with the U.S. local offices.  Through contacts in the office of the Under Secretary of War arrangements were completed along these lines and the U.S. Procurement Districts in each area instructed to co-operate fully with the Security Division on all matters of proteeton covering the following   a Physical protection  b Enforcement of regulations applying to visitors  c Checking of employees  d Guard Personnel  e Investigation of suspected cases of sabotage  f Reasons for slowing up of production  g Subversive activities  h Labour and general conditions applying. All surveys and recommendations made by U.S. authorities in connection with plants where there are direct or indirect British interests were supplied to the Security Division.  Relations with the various U.S. offices in Washington and local districts have been exceptionally good and full co-operation has been received. This has enabled t.is Section to have up-to-date records on all matters relating to plant protection in those companies in which there are British interests. Further the Section has h d the assistance an reports of the U.S. Internal Security Division Washington and the U.S. Procurement District officers on any investigations respecting suspected sabotage since these departments have recognized the British, 15. interest in all matters relating to protection and which in any fay affect anticipated production.  In March 1942 the supervision of the U.S. Internal Sedurity Division was transferred from the office of the Under-Secretary of War to the office of the Provost Marshal General with however the same Officers in charge.  The present activities of the Section cover   a Liaison with U.S. Provost Marshal General's office and Ordnance Department Security Division Washington also U.S. local Procurement offices.  b Exchange of plant security information with interested U.S. Government departments.  c Following up on all protection measures in force at the plants where there are direct British contracts or from which we receive important Lend-Lease materials.  d Contact with various Purchasing Commission Divisions and checking reports received from them. 10. Section D.T. A.4. Credit Investigations. This Section is primarily concerned with four types of investigation  a Persons applying for visas to take up enployment in the U.K. or British territories.  b British subjects conducting themselves in a questionable manner or on whom en uiries have been received from London or U.S. sources.  c Questionable persons other than British.  d Commercial investigations on behalf of the Purchasing Commission S.I.S. other British Missions. During the past twelve months a total of approximately 2600 investigations have been conducted of which about half were commercial enquiries on behalf of  S.I.S. in connection with Axis commercial economic and blockade-evasion activities in the U.S.A. Numerous contacts are maintained with official and. business connections credit agencies banks private detective agencies etc. so as to secure comprehensive and quick re orts on all enquiries. 11. Section D.T. A.5. Investigation of Personnel for Allied Armed Forces. This Section investigates the moral and politidal background of all applicants for the following services  1. All Allied Service personnel. 2. Civilian Technical Corps personnel. 3. Royal Air Force personnel recruited by the Canadian Aviation Bureau. 4 Personnel taken on by Pan American Airways Africa Ltd. 5. Air Transport Auxiliary personnel., 16  6. Various Techmicians sent to the United Kingdom or other British territory by the British Air Commission. 7. Doctors recruited for Doctors for Britain . Recruiting of personnel for the Civilian Technical Corps ceased at the end of January 1942. Recruiting for the Royal Air Force through the Canadian Aviation Bureau ceased for all practical purposes at the end of May. On the other hand personnel taken on by Pan American Airways shows a definite increase beginning in March.  Briefly and in a general way the following are the steps taken in vetting  the large majority of personnel   a Fingerprints are obtained and cleared through either by the F.B.I. or the R.C.M.P. or both as the case may be.  b Names of applicants are cleared through Security Division and S.I.S. Registries Passport Control and against Reject Lists maintained by this Section.  c Applicants' histories and backgrounds are thoroughly investigated. With regard to the vetting of Allied Service personnel it has been agreed that the Allies themselves are in the best position to effect the preliminary  vetting of their own nationals and of American citizens of Allied descent. This is done by the Security Officer of the Allied Military Mission concerned who questions the applicant and obtains recommendations from local pat iotic societies priests and so on. When this has been done the applicant is fingerprinted and vetting carried out by the Section proceeds as indicated above.  In connection with the Civilian Technical Corps this Section has also been active in verifying the reasons given by members of this organization who have requested repatriation to the United States from the United Kingdom. Reasons given are generally illness in the family destitution etc.  The personnel taken on by the Royal Air Force Ferry Command is not vetted by this Section. This work is done by the Royal Air Force Ferry Command Security Officer. On the other hand the names andparticulars of these recruits are passed through this Section for clearing through its Reject List Security co-ordination Registries etc. and any derogatory information brought to light by this check is indicated to the Royal Air Force Ferry Command Security Officer., Since August 1%1j when this Section was institute a total of about 9000 investigations have been conducted as follows Civilian Technical Corps 2950 Canadian Aviation Bureau 1950 Pan American Airways 1447 Allied Armed Forces Norwegians Poles Dutch Free French etd. 2304 miscellaneous service enquiries 236., PART III  SPECIAL OPERATIONS  S Oo Eo, CONTENTS  Page No.  EarlyOrganization  1 Beginning.... 1  2. First Directives.... 2  3. Minorities.......... 3  4. Pressure propaganda. 4  5. Far East............ 4  6. Documentary Warfare. 5  7. Colonel Donovan..... e 4 oet o s s 5  11. Later Developments 1941-1942  1. British and Overseas Features................. 6  2. Subsequent Expansion.. 7  3. Training School.. 7  4. PresentPosition.... 8  111. Liaison with United States Authorities 1 Coordinator of Infonitatxon. 9  2. War Department Psychological Warfare Branch . 17   V  IV. Present Structure  i e0  1. General Organization... oe a 19 2. Latin America.... 19  1 Development.......... 19    009009901   II Operations........... 22  9000900    III The Future..... 23   000 00   3. Minorities... 25  000900900    i General.. 25   n Groups............... 0 oo e 26  90900000    iii South America........ 31   iv Labour..... 31   v Irish Americans...... 31  - 0   vi Recent Developments . 32   O 9   vii Future Possibilities. 34  4. Political Warfare Except Far East ... 35   i Foundation ......... 35   ii Broadcasting........ 35   iii Pressure Propaganda. 36  9 90 0 6 0    iv Verbal Propaganda... 39  09 90 I  9 00001    v Expansion... 40  990999OO   vi Conclusion........ 45   0 t0 09090 5. Far East Political Warfare 47   00000O00000O0O905    i Beginning 47   ii Policy 48   0 00O00 099ae0 0 0 o o0 0   0ea 90909009   iii Propaganda Channels 48   iv Operations......... 49   00 090990 099990  v The Future....... 58  6. Intelligence.... 60  7. Training... 63  8. WashingtonOffice.. 66 9. Documentary Warfare........ 68  V. Communications  1. London Lagos andCairo.. 70  2. LatinAmerica.... 70 3 NorthAmerica.......  70  VI. Finance and Records  1. Accounts. 71  2. Registry. 71, DIAGRAMS Facing Page Functions of G.P. Section 47 Dollar Expenditure  April 21 to May 20 1942 72, THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL JOCUMEN retained IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 1. EARLY ORGANIZATION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1953 Beginning. Prior to December 1940 there existed no S.O organization as such in the Americas. There were two agents in the United States who had been sent here some months previously with general instructions to endeavour to implement the work on which the D organization had been engaged in Europe. Apart from the personal relationships established by G with such persons as Mr. J. Edgar Hoover and Colonel Donovan no organized attempt had been possible either to harness the potential strength of the U.รยง. cr to influence entry of the U.S. into the war. In December 1940 G visited London and at the request of CD agreed to assume control of all S.O. activities in the Western Hemisphere. This arrangement received the approval of C.S.S. and communications were set up to run accordingly. No provision for staff was made at this time and it was left to G to explore his way and make whatever recommendations to London that he saw fit. The original objectives as agreed between G and cp were as follows  a To obtain contacts with all the various groups of dissatisfied European refugees in the U.S.A.  b To obtain contact with enemy subjects or the subjects of enemy occupied countries who either for gain or for patriotic motives would be prepared to endeavour to re enter their respective countries for whatever purposes may be considered necessary on behalf of GREAT BRITAIN.  c To arrange lines of communication from the U.S .A. into enemy countries in EUROPE and/or into eneuy occupied countries in EUROPE., 2. First Directives. In January 1941 Colonel C. G. Vickers visited New lork and after discussions with G the framework of an S.O. organization was laid out. G appointed a chief of the orgsuization G.1C0 with an assistant to serve under him G.101 . The following principal directives were then agreed  1. To appoint an S.O. representative in each of the Latin American Republics with a view to establishing an S.O. organization to cover Latin America. 2. To recruit in the Americas citizens of enemy or enemyoccupied countries who would return to their countries of origin to contact already existing subversive elements and to form new subversive cells. 3. To take of the U.S. into the war and to discredit the enemies of the Allies in the U.S 4 To make contact with all the various groups of dissatisfied European refugees and free movements in the U.S.A  5. To arrange lines of communication from the Western Hemis phere into enemy and enemy-occupied countrie In view of the large territory to be covered the newly-formed  anization remained in the embryonic stage for the first six months  s existence although a considerable number of operations were  ed out mainly in the U.S. field and in the field of recruits. As  is South America S.O. representatives of the following territories  isited New fork by June 1941 and had had their appointments con  i Venezuela North Brazil South Brazil Trinidad Cuba Colombia, Minorities. In the U.S. contact was established with several minority  groups and the creation of organizations among these was begun.  The first' of these was Austria Action which was an ambitious if somewhat over-optimistic attempt to unite all anti-Nazi Austrians. In spite of the constant bickering between the various groups however this project rendered pioneering service insofar as it was the first minority organization to receive benevolent recognition from the U.S. Department of Justice which at that time was keeping a watchful eye upon all foreign minorities in the U.S.  Among the Jugoslavs progress was made by the establishment of a Slav Bulletin which created a centre for anti-Nazi activities among the Serbs Croats and Slovenes in the U.S.A. Courses of lectures by democratic Slav leaders were arranged and various vigilante groups were established to keep a watch on Nazi agents among the Croats and Slovaks.  A close contact was also established with the main democratic group among the Ukrainians. This group known as Defence of the Ukraine was composed of old recognized leaders of the Ukrainian democrats the social revolutionists and the Working Mens Group.  S.O. trod warily among the Hungarians during its first six months and established contact for observation purposes only with those who had the entree ento the Hungarian Communist Party. Contact was also established with the anti-Nazi elements among the Carpatho-Russian clergy which was found useful in counteracting the propaganda of pro-Nazi Hungarians. Greater progress was made among the Arabs this was at the time when a British crusade to liberate Syria was considered imminent . The principal American Arab newspaper A1 Hoda was persuaded to become entirely pro-British. A Near East Information Bureau v/as established in New fork and broadcasts over WRUL were subsidized in all the principal Near Eastern languages., 4'  Among the Italians a close co-operation was established with the Mazzini Society and contacts were made through the various labour organizations with young Italian socialists in an attempt to persuade them into a more active anti-Nazi policy.  4. Pressure Propaganda. As regards subversive propaganda in the U.S. itself there was no dearth of possibilities. On the contrary the field was so vast that it was difficult to know where to start. A beginning at any rate was made on a fairly wide front. Enemy agents were of course the main target as may be instanced by the case of Dr. Eurt RIETH which is dealt with elsewhere in this report. On the native American front a variety of organizations was established ranging from the vehement Non-Sectarian Anti-Nazi League to the comparatively lofty Committee for Inter-American Co-Operation . Through these attacks were made on the isolationists and native anti- British propagandists.  Meanwhile on what was then S.O. 1 work a wide variety of broadcasts in some 15 languages was organised and an extensive system for sending rumours back into Europe was set up.  5. Far East In the first six months of its existence the G organization acquired an additional function in fulfilling the requirements of the Far Eastern Branch of S.O. at Singapore.  Publication was arranged in the U.S. press of suitable news stories articles and cartoons and items by radio commentators. Broad casts both for internal and foreign consumption were organized. A special daily news service to and from Singapore was set up leaflets and pamphlets were printed and distributed in Japanese among the Japanese communities in the U.S. The same operations were repeated in South America so that a kind of snowball effect was achieved., The operations of the Far Wastern Section are given separately in the special report of the Section but undoubtedly the most important of these was the series of Spinks articles on the German Fifth Column in Japan . These were published in a New York paper and were subsequently translated into Spanish and Portuguese for distribution throughout South America.   6. Documentary Warfare.  Meanwhile it had already been learned that in the realm of documentary warfare certain specialised activities were essential and as part of a general letter-writing campaign proposals were sent home in July 1941 for the creation of Station M a station consisting of specialists in the art of manufacturing documents.  Permission to set up this station was received the following month.  7. Colonel Donovan. At this stage Colonel Donovan who had been for many months in close touch with G received his directive from the President to set up an organization to deal with all forms of secret activities in the shape of SIS SOE and PWE. At the end of June 1941 a meeting took place at which Colonel Donovan expounded his ideas to the various section heads of the G organization who in turn put forward their own suggestions. Lines of liaison and co-operation  were quickly put down.  With this the initial period of development may be said to have terminated and in July G returned to London for discussions on future activities.,   o  II. LATER DEVELOPMENTS 1941-19A2 1. British and Overseas Features. The discussions between G and CD in London during G's second visit in July 1941 were based on the justifiable assumption that SOE work in the Americas was bound to develop very extensively. In addition to the youthful but rapidly-growing organization of Colonel Donovan with its many problems of liaison an ambitious programme was planned for Latin America requiring a great increase both in the number of field agents and in the headquarters staff. Furthermore it was agreed that a wide expansion would be made in the realm of PWB activities or S.O. 1 .as they then were. The most immediate problem had been that of cover for the grow ing organization. After a series of discussions with the British Embassy it was mutually agreed to form a concern with the name of British and Overseas Features . The overt function of this body was to distribute news and articles from the U.S.A. press to newspapers and other publi cations in Latin America and to receive from Latin America similar stories and articles for distribution throughout the British Empire. Accordingly office space was taken for the new concern whose name was registered by the Embassy with the State Department. At the same time G.300 was registered as Director. This arrangement was effected in May 1941. Throughoutthe summer and autumn of 1941 British and Overseas Features provided cover for the G organization and also discharged its overt functions. Unfortunately there was a danger that the Ministry of Information under whose jurisdiction the British and Overseas Features nominally came as a news agency might .be seriously compromised if sub versive activities were traced to it. This difficulty eventually led to the liquidation of British and Overseas Features towards the end of November. It was found possible however to embody the staff and office, arrangements in the statistical branch of the Directorate of Security Coordination which has since that date provided cover for the G organization. Subsequent Expansion.  From August 1941 onward the activities of the G organization were expanded greatly in all sections.  Directives for work were clarified by a very helpful visit which AD/Z paid to New York in September. The most continuing expansion was made in the Latin American and the Minorities Sections. A great increase of work of course took place in the PWE branch i.e. GP and Far Eastern Sections but as these were primarily concerned with psychological warfare in all its forms they fluctuated greatly according to the situation of the moment.  In the Minorities'Section lines were spread out among all the minority groups in the U.S.  In Latin America expansion and training were undertaken simul taneously. In June 1941 six chief agents were operating in Latin America except for Guatemala Paraguay and the Guianas with the temporary exception of Bolivia where the chief agent has proved unsatisfactory and is being replaced.  All the chief agents have visited New York. All of them with one exception have been given training in Canada. G now controls a network of 14 chief agents in Latin America employing 219 sub-agents in addition to numerous contacts. Training School.  The training school in Canada was opened for its first batch of students in December 1941 Since that time it has trained personnel of G's Head Office and also all the chief agents in Latin America with one exception in addition to a stream of key officials from Colonel, 8  D.onovan's organization and the Federal Bui'eau of Investigation. Its future programme indicates that it has an even greater role to play Tfith the Canadian as well as the American authorities for the former are now very anxious to send to the school certain people whom they foresee using as part of their large organisation comparable to the auxiliary units -in England. In addition to this the school has aroused the interest of the Psychological Warfare Branch of the U.S. Chiefs of Staff and the first students from this organization are going through their training at the time of writing.  The school has fulfilled a usefulness which cannot be under estimated in creating and developing friendly feeling towards Britain by those American organizations which have made use of it. In part of course this is due to the fact that people going to the same place for the same course of instruction tend to develop a common idea and so to be welded together. But credit is due to the personalities of the instructors who made a very deep impression on the American students by their thoroughness sincerity and experience. The American students who went to the school with a certain feeling of scepticism returned from it full of enthusiastic admiration for the aims and ideals of SOE and through this for the whole British War Effort.  4-Present Position. At the present time the G organization is carrying on an extensive liaison with all-the American organizations interested in S.0 work and in psychological warfare. It has been instrumental in persuading at least one of these The Foreign Information Services to carry out secret operations in the U.S. against the Fifth Column Propagandists on an impressive scale It has an extensive organization in South America. It maintains close contact with all minorities and Free Movements in the U.S. and with its American friends it is engaged in recruiting for all forms of SOE work in Europe the Middle East and the Far East.  While the present indecision concerning possibilities of action in Latin America continues it is also operating its own lines of intelligence in this territory so that should conditions demand it opportunities will  not be. lost., III. LIAISON WITH UNITED STATES AUTHORITIES 1. Coordinator of Information.  i Special Operations Section Liaison with the office of Colonel William J. Donovan D.S. Coordinator of Information C.O.I. commenced as soon as his office was opened. For some time of course there had been a close personal relationship between G and Colonel Donovan which greatly facilitated this official liaison. During the summer and autumn of 1941 liaison was conducted between the officers concerned in the G organization and Colonel Donovan in person. When G's Washington office was opened in October 1941 Colonel Donovan had no S.O. headquarters organization at all. He had appointed Colonel Robert A. Solborg to head this branch and as a preliminary Colonel Solborg had been sent over to London to visit S.O.E. in order to study their methods of operation and their system of training. Colonel Solborg returned to Washington in the early days of January 1942 having been very much impressed by what he had seen and learnt and ready to set up a headquarters organization in Washington. He was however considerably hampered by apparent reason of his inability to secure a clear-cut directive regarding the scope of the S.O. organization which he was expected to organize. The G office did all it could to persuade him to go ahead and create an organization something on the lines of what he had seen in London but for some reason he seemed loath to do so. When it eventually took shape it was known as Special Operations Section S.O.S. .  Meanwhile a number of actual projects were suggested and steps were taken by Colonel Solborg to pat them into operation. The projects were for the penetration of the Azores and the Cape Verde Islands and operations in North Africa. G encouraged these projects and gave assistance by way of introducing to Colonel Donovan organization certain personalities with whom his staff was going to work particularly in the Azores and Cape Verde Island projects. As far as North Africa was concerned it was arranged that Lieut.-Colonel W.A. Eddy should, proceed to Tangier as Military Attache both to act as an observer and to represent Colonel Donovan's S.O.S. and S.I.S. His original charter tvas principally to try and establish communications between the various points in North Africa utilizing as far as was possible the State Department observers who were already established in this territory.  During this period for a variety of reasons little progress was made in getting the headquarters organization adequately set up. A start however was made in the field of training. Colonel Garland H.  Williams was recruited to study the position and to set up training  schools. His previous experience had been in the running of the C.I.P.  Contra-Intelligence Police whose functions in peace-time were similar to those of the F.B.I. but limited to the Army. At the outset  Colonel Williams had little idea of exactly what S.O. training involved but after his visit to the S.O.S. training camp in Canada he began to show definite signs of tinderstanding what was required. Colonel Williams is an extremely active and energetic officer and he immediately got busy with locating sites for schools two of which were secured in extremely  good positions. Meanwhile Colonel Solborg was becoming rather restive due to his inability to get the precise instructions that he required for the further  expansion of the S.O.S. organization. He himself had visited North Africa for U.S. Military Intelligence during the previous summer and knew a good  deal about this territory and consequently was specially interested in  operations in that area. Early in February 1942 he put up the suggestion to Colonel Donovan that he himself should proceed to Lisbon to take  personal charge of the operations in North Africa and the Iberian Peninsula and this suggestion was accepted by his chief. This field was later restricted to Portugal and Spain and Colonel Eddy was placed in charge of North Africa. It was arranged that Colonel Preston Goodfellow  should take over executive headship of S.O.S. after Colonel Solborg s departure.  Colonel Goodfellow's association with Colonel Donovan had been a long-standing one since he had been the U.S. Military Intelligence liaison with Colonel Donovan's organization from the time it started., 11. He retained this position in spite of his increased duties and re sponsibilities and remained the head of the liaison section of the  U.S. Military Intelligence as well as executive head of -S.O.S. Tifhile this has many advantages from Colonel Donovan s point of view in giving him access to the U. -S. Military Intelligence organization and the War Department generally it has of necessity restricted Colonel Goodfellow in the scope of his activities. Immediately after he took over Colonel Goodfellow arranged for the seconding of U.S. War Department personnel to the Coordinatoaf of Information for the purpose of staffing his training establishments. After a comparatively short delay he obtained authorization from the American Chiefs of Staff for the seconding of about 30 officers and 150 other ranks for this specific purpose. From the training point of view this was an im mediate advantage and enabled him to recruit quite a number of officers with which to get his training going. Special courses were drawn up at the S.O.E. training school in Canada for instructing a number of these men the courses varying in length from full course of one month down to short course of one week. There is no doubt that the training given at this school has been and will be of enormous benefit to the training side of Colonel Donovan s S.O.S. In the meanwhile a number of additional projects were suggested the principal of which were in China and in the Middle East. The China project was initiated by request from General Stilwell to the War Department that a certain officer by the name of Captain Carl Eifler be trained and sent out to him for the purpose of assisting in organizing gueailla groups in the Chinese theatre of war. Immediate steps were taken to get Eifler back from Hawaii where he was posted and to collect around him a party of suitable men for work in that field. While from the point of view of the G organization Eifler himself and those he personally recruited did not appear to be particularly suitable as organizers for S.O. work in view of the fact that General Stilwell had specifically asked for him it was felt that this project must be allowed to continue and must be assisted in every possible way by the  G. organization., With regard to the Middle East Colonel Donovan1s agreement was secured to any organization that they may have in the Middle East being entirely operated as a joint undertaking with S.O.E. Middle East. This arrangement was made of course without prejudice to his S.I.S. which Colonel Donovan wished to be independent of any British service. The conclusion of this arrangement coincided with the return of Mr. Frank Mauran from the Middle East where he had been an observer for the Coordinator of Information and he was very shortly afterward appointed as the Country-Section-Head for the Middle East. When Mauran was in Cairo he had been in touch with certain of the Yugoslav leaders there and came back very much imbued with the necessity of assisting the Yugoslav guerrilla forces operating in Yugoslavia. He also came back with certain specific requirements for them. Although efforts were made by G s staff to dissuade them. Colonel Donovan's S.Q.S. went ahead with a proposal which they put up to the American Chiefs of Staff for providing certain of these urgent requirements including airplanes military equipment radio equipment and medical stores. After considerable delay the U.S. Chiefs of Staff advised that they were sympathetic with the project but as the Middle East was a British theatre of war they felt the whole project should be handed over to and handled by the British. Subsequent to that date considerable negotiations had gone on with S.O.-S. regarding the sending out a full representative from their organization to sit on the S.O.E. Board in Cairo and it is hoped that in the near future when his terms of reference have been agreed upon a suitable officer will be despatched. In the meanwhile. Captain Robert Low has already been sent out to act as local liaison officer  pending the arrival of the full empowered representative.  A further project in which G was consulted was a possibility of operating in Australia. The Coordinator of Information was in any event sending out a certain Major Jones to Australia on projects in connection with his Foreign Information Services and it was suggested that he might approach the Supreme Commander General MacArthur regarding S.O.S. work in that area. As a result however of communications with General MacArthur it transpired that he already had an organization in being and did not require Colonel Donovan to operate in that field., 13. Recently the staff of S.Q.'S. has been strengthened by the addition of Lieut.-Commander W.H. Vanderbilt who had previously been working the Coordinator's New York office. At the moment he is concentrating on recruiting but the idea is that he should be Secondin- Command of the whole section.  During the visit of MT it was arranged that GT-3 should be lent to the Coordinator to advise both S.Q.S. and S.I.S. on the subject of training in addition to Captain W.E. Fairbarn who has been working as an instructor of instructors for Colonel Donovan for some weeks. GT-3 took up his duties in the Washington office quite recently but was required to return to Canada due to the death of his relief there. During the short period he was with the Coordinator of Information he made a series of recommendations for the improvement of their training system all of which have been accepted.  There is no reason to suppose that S.O.E.'s close contact with Colonel Donovan's S.O.S. will not be of great value to S.O.E. In one field viz. manufacturing and supply of plastic and devices it is possible that  S.O.S. may be of inestimable value. S.O.E. has already agreed to launch into a manufacturing programme on a considerable scale and S.O.E. has arranged to lend G.50600 and G.50601 to organize this section of their work. Considerable progress has already been made and It is hoped that the production of PE will be going forward in the very near future in increasing quantities. S.O.S. has also gone a long way in starting the manufacturing of S.O.E.'s standard toys and devices. The first programme as arranged is for a total of 10 million dollars of which it is hoped almost 4 million will be available to S.O.E.  ii S.I.S. Research and Analysis Through all the period of the recent development of Colonel Donovan's S.0. and S.I.S. organizations close liaison has been maintained with the Colonel himself and with the other branches of his work. Considerable quantities of material of the background nature have been supplied to S.O.E. from his Research and Analysis branch and a close touch kept with his S.I.S. staff with whom the Washington office are on extremely intimate terms., M.  iii Foreign Information Services Colonel Donovan's first act on receiving his directive from the President was the appointment of Mr. Robert E. Sherwood as Assistant Coordinator of Information and as head of the Foreign Information Services F.I.S. This organization was created to carry out propaganda of all forms except in the domestic field and in Latin America. Mr. Sherwood visited London in the summer of 1941 and was received cordially by both SOE and PWE each of whom took him fully into their confidence. He returned to the U.S. filled with enthusiasm for political warfare in all its forms and proceeded to construct his organization.  The various sections of the FIS which are shown below in the chart of the GP section of the G office are as followst   l Planning and Policy comprising Robert Sherwood Edmond Taylor po i n  James Warburg Wallace Deuel Harold Guinsberg/1 and Percy Winner.   11 Radio News Room under Joseph Barnes 1 comprises writers translaters and announcers.  n  ill Middle East Section under Wallace Deuel.   IV Central European Section under James Warburg.  V French Section under Edmond Taylor.  VI Publications Section under Edward Stanley. This section deals with all printed propaganda leaflets pamphlets booklets pictures etc. g   VII Technical Radio under Murry Brophy deals with the purchase and construction of transmitters.  Vlll Travel Section under Harold Guinsberg deals with the recruiting  and despatch of FIS agents to the field.  For many years correspondent of the Chicago Tribune in Europe. He is the author of Strategy of Terror the first detailed analysis of German political warfare.   Member of the banking family and has for many years been interested in the organization of the various minorities in the U.S. /   Formerly Berlin correspondent of the Chicago Daily News . He is one of America's leading experts on Germany and his recent book People under Hitler is one of the best books on Nazi Germany.   President of the Viking Press Book Publishing Co.  Rome correspondent of the International News Service from 1939 to 1941 His assignment to PWE in London where for a time he took over Mr. Whitney's functions as chief liaison officer for the C. of I. has fitted him admirably for his new work on the FIB Planning Board.   Formerly foreign correspondent for the New York Herald Tribune in Paris Berlin and Moscow., The task of the G station from then on was not only to carry out political warfare but to assist and build up Foreign Information Services.  Governmental control of such propaganda facilities as the radio has never yet been established and the FIS found themselves in difficulties from the outset not only with the various commercial companies but with other U.S. Government Agencies. They thus had to rely very considerably upon the help of the G organization and for many months for example SOE continued the secret subsidies to various radio broadcasts on behalf of the FIS during which time FIS were able to put their affairs in order.  It is possible to summarize the progress of FIS by such events  as the followingt- K0v. 3 1941 Shortwave broadcasts to Europe start in Czech others in Swedish Finnish Italian later. Dec. 7 U.S. declares war on Japan and later on Germany and Italy. All radio broadcasts from the East and West Coasts handed over by SOE to FIS together with personnel. Jan. 6 1942 First U.S. leaflet dropped over France. Jan. 31. BBC rebroadcasts of American programmes start. Mar. 12. First FIS photograph telephotoed from U.S. to Australia via Montreal. May 21. First U.S. picture radioed to Cairo. The above examples of course may be considered to be of a fairly overt nature but they involved constant consultation with the G organization training and despatch of men to the field which was undertaken on a wide scale difficulties with such U.S. authorities as the State Department which were only circumvented by the freedom with which FIS were allowed to use  iy  An experienced journalist who for many years was head of the photograph department of the Associated Press.  As the Director of the Columbia Broadcasting System he has the necessary influence among the various radio manufacturing companies and the necessary experience to fit him for his post as head of the technical side of the radio organization., S.O.S. cables for communication with PWE experts in Britain access to information which they could not obtain even from their own services. In point of fact FIS would not be in its present healthy state if it had not been for the support and advice it received from Gj indeed without this it might never have survived its first six months. Liaison was effected in Washington where policy was decided and in New York where operational headquarters were established at 270 Madison Avenue. This liaison was carried out by the two G sections concerned with Political Warfare namely GP and GO-3. Functional liaison was set up in such a way that when for example the Publications Sections of FIS were receiving the undivided attention of one G officer the Radio Section another and so on while matters of policy and planning were settled between Mr. Sherwood on the one hand and G 101 and G 500 on the other.  Latterly FIS have shown an interest in smuggling documents and propaganda devices of all kinds into Europe end the G organization has undertaken to handle this in Latin America for them. At this stage therefore South America assumes an even greater importance as a territory from which enemy countries may be penetrated.  Co-operation between the G organization and the FIS has been complete in every respect. It has never been marred by any dispute as to respective spheres of influence and operations. Each operation is regarded as a joint affair and the SOE objective of harnessing and guiding the tremendous potential power of the U.S.A. Has thus been achieved in this field.  Representatives of FIS have been appointed and despatched to various parts of the world including Stockholm Berne Chungking New Delhi Melbourne Cairo Istanbul and Brazzaville.  Extensive co-operation is now being arranged on behalf of SOE's mission at Accra under W 45. Considerable material is being ordered through the FIS and will be despatched to various parts of this territory. In addition a liaison officer fill be sent to Accra by FIS while co ordination of British and American operations on the spot and in New York.  With the future of PWE representation still in doubt it is difficult to make any kind of prediction about the future of this liaison but Mr. Sherwood and his chief assistants are most anxious to cQntinue the close relationship and co-operation which has been established over the past nine months., 17. 2. War Department Psychological Warfare Branch The Psychological Warfare Branch P.W.B. of the U.S. War Department is a sub-committee of the American Joint Planners and is under the chairmanship of Colonel Oliver N. Solbert. Its charter provides that it shall be the U.S. military authority to coordinate all activities for the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the field of subversive activities and propaganda.  In many ways P.W.B. ideas are very much in accordance with those of S.O.E. For example the perfection and manufacture of a small single shot pistol for arming civil population which weapon has been approved by the American COS and which they are manufacturing in large quantities. They have asked the G organization to work with them on the use of this weapon and to arrange its distribution in enemy-occupied territories. The quantities which they expect to have available are very large amounting to 1 million by the end of July and thereafter 2 million a month if required.  The G organization have arranged to take a number of their officers at the SO training school in Canada for a full month's course starting very shortly and it is believed that in this way SOE will keep in close touch with this organization. While the work which they anticipate doing is to some extent of a military nature there should be considerable opportunities for gaining benefit from this liaison in the future. The G organization has been given to understand that this section of the U.S. War Department may be amalgamated with Colonel Donovan's S.O.S. From SOS's point of view this would be a highly desirable development. It is important to remember however that so far as S.O. work is concerned in America it is much more of a service matter than it is with SOE and the personnel who are likely to be in it are much more likely to be service men. The contact therefore with this section of the U.S. War Department may develop into one of major importance.  A more recent development of this liaison has been in the realm of pure psychological warfare. At Colonel Solbert s request he was placed in touch with G 101 and asked his assistance and advice in many problems ranging from the creation of a rumour organization to the establishment of propaganda units with U.S. task forces. The latter is an, ambitious project which may well have a great futurej it is an illustration that the U.S army is looking boldly ahead to new methods of v/arfare and recognizes the value of the psychological factor., IV. PRESENT STRUCTURE' General Organization. Broadly speaking the G organisation is divided into six sections.  i L  ii M  iii P  iv F  v Intelligence G.I. 0   vi Training G.T. In addition to the above there are the Office Administration  G.A. the Documentary Warfare Branch Station M and the Washington Office. Each section with the exception of G.I. and Station M is in liaison with the American authorities in some cases direct  C.O.I. F.I.S. P.W.B. and in others F.B.I. through S.I.S. The heads of each section are directly responsible to G and report through him to London. Coordination of activity is maintained through the Office Administrator who is responsible for the distribution of incoming reports and telegrams and for checking all outgoing telegrams and reports to prevent duplication. A weekly conference is held each Saturday at which G presides and at which each section head together with representatives from the Washington office report on progress and outstanding questions. Every fortnight each section draws up a report on its progress and these reports are collated into a general fortnightly progress report which is sent to London. Latin America. 1. Development The S.O. Organization in Latin America has had a rapid growth. In June 19Al only six Chief Agents were operating and their sole means of communications with the G office were by L.M.T. Code. At that time the entire west coast Ecuador Peru and Chile, was considered part of G.5000's territory and one sub-agent for  each of those countries was in communication with Bogota but not with New York. At the time of writing S.O. New York has a Chief  Agent at work in every Latin American country except for Guatemala Paraguay and the Guianas and with the temporary exception of Bolivia  where a changeover is taking place.  While S.O. agents did the best they could establishing useful contacts building up rudimentary information services inspiring propaganda and surveying their territories for targets etc. until December 1941 they were labouring under the obvious handicaps of amateurs tackling a difficult technical problem for which the experience and education of their peacetime lives had in no way equipped them.  At present G controls a network of 14 chief agents employing no less than 219 sub-agents in addition to other contacts and covering almost every area from the Rio Grande to Cape Horn. Each area is organized on standard lines with a Chief Agent who is in touch with the local H. M. Embassy and Legation a Chief Assistant who maintains contact through cut-outs with propaganda minorities opposition groups key men in communications and industry thugs etc. and a parallel but separate shadow organization composed entirely of nationals of the country.  In Chile Peru Venezuela and Uruguay the S.O. organization on the above lines is virtually complete. In Ecuador Brazil and Central America it is far advanced towards completion. In Argentine  G. 6000 has not yet found a satisfactory man to head his shadow organization but has every other branch efficiently set up. In Mexico S.O. has trod warily where G.8 500 has a skeleton organization chiefly for purposes of intelligence and recruiting in Colombia owing to the extremely close cooperation between S.O. and the Chief of the special branch of the Colombian police G.5 500's organization is built on a different plan which is highly effective while the present Government retains power as the services of nearly 300 police agents are at G.5 500's disposal., During the past six months every territory has sent either its Chief Agent or his assistant to New York and Canada where every effort has been made by the staff of the New York office to get to know them to make friends of them in fact to reach a personal relationship which makes for mutual trust and understanding. It is no exaggeration to say that these efforts have been markedly successful. There is now no Chief Agent who is not confident that he can count on the support and energetic help of the Head Office in any emergency and in return it has become more than ever obvious of late that the organization as a whole can rely on a great volume of hard work and conscientious effort from its Agents in the field.  In accordance with the general policy no operations whatever have been attempted since America's entry into the War however in spite of this decision which must be discouraging to a man in the field the keenness of the agents has in no way diminished. All stations have been sending in a wealth of intelligence material and all instructions from the New York office have been promptly and efficiently carried out.  Since April 19Al all stations have been working on the W/T communications scheme which is being carried out jointly by  S.O.E. and S.I.S. and many of the required operators have been selected and are already undergoing training. The principal weakness which would be felt by the organization should it be called upon to carry out any operations involving the use of explosives is the lack of stores of toys and devices in the field. The G organization possesses some stores at the training school in Canada and have now taken delivery of a considerable stock in Trinidad. In addition dumps have been built or excavated in British Honduras Peru Chile and Uruguay others are under construction in most of the remaining territories. They are unfortunately at present empty however certain quantities of commercial explosives gelignite & Dynamite are at the disposal of some S.O. Chief Agents notably in Peru and Uruguay. A small  selection including some limpets incendiaries and P.E. is in the hands of G.14 100 in Recife. Further all Chief Agents, have been supplied with comprehensive directions for the manufacture of home-made incendiary and other devices from materials which can be readily and innocently obtained on the spot. One sub agent of G.bjOOO's in Argentine is an experimental chemist and explosives expert who has constructed a number of devices in a secret laboratory in Buenos Aires.  Taken as a whole it must be admitted the G organization is not as yet as well provided with the tools of the saboteur's trade as it is with the men trained to handle than and the organization equipped to set them in motion. If it were decided to establish dumps in the field a month or six weeks should suffice to remedy this.  11. Operations The G organization attempted very few operations during 1941 Several plans in connection with enemy shipping that were prepared had to be cancelled before the time came for carrying them out. Three instances of the effectiveness of S.O. action in the political field may however be quoted.   i In July 1941j a Nazi plot to seize power in Bolivia was brought to light in time for the local government to thwart it. This was made possible by the interception of a document from Major Belmonte Bolivian Military attache in Berlin containing the details of the projected revolt. S.O.E. may legitimately take the credit for this exposure which besides strengthening the position of the anti-Axis Bolivian government led to the adoption of numerous security measures throughout South America and encouraged a wave of anti-Nazi feeling extending to the U.S.  ii In October 1941j shortly after the declaration by the U.S. of a shoot on sight policy towards German submarines the President made a radio address to the nation in which he said I have in my possession a map of South America drawn up in Berlin . The map to which the President referred was a German document showing the proposed partitioning of South America in accordance with the new World Order, 23  dividing it into colonies and spheres of influences of the Axis powers. Although the actual map was never published this revelation of the President's was very widely quoted and discussed and played its part in bringing to the people of America the realization that this was not merely another European War but that Hitler had designs on the Western Hemisphere just as far-reaching as he had on the Old World. It is believed that only three copies of this map were ever made one of which remained in Hitler's personal possession one in that of Bohle A.O. Chief and the third was sent to Von Themann German Ambassador in the Argentine. The G organization was able to obtain the original from the German Embassy in Buenos Aires and was instrumental in placing it in President Roosevelt's hands.   iii President Vargas of Brazil whose son-in-law was President of the Brazilian branch of the LATI airline was long reluctant to take any measures against this Italian Company. His attitude changed overnight however when the American Ambassador in Rio de Janeiro Vfas able to bring to his attention a letter written by General Liotta the President of the Company in Rome to a correspondent in Brazil which contained insulting references to Brazilians in general and to Vargas in particular. It was due in great part to the existence of this letter that the Lati concession in Brazil was revoked ten weeks before Brazil broke off relations with the Axis  V  powers. The G organization was fortunate enough to be the means of bringing this letter which was in the form of a microphotograph concealed in the lining of an Axis   sympathizer's clothes to the attention of the American Ambassador in Brazil with the satisfactory results indicated above.  111. The Future The immediate goals of S.O. endeavour in the Americas have  already been achieved, 24   1 The United States have entered the War  2 The majority of the Latin American republics are if not at War at least in a state of pro-United Nations non-belligerency  3 And the U.S. has at last awakened to the grave dangers which threaten that irreplaceable storehouse of the raw materials of war -South America. It would of course be ridiculous to give S.O.E. the credit for having brought about either of the first two of these events but it is not unreasonable to allow that it inflicted a series of pin-pricks in the appropriate quarters which contributed a little towards the final result. S.O.E. is certainly in a large measure responsible for the third. For the past year the G organization has realized and has never ceased to proclaim the life-and-death importance of South America both economically and strategically to the war effort. It has marshalled facts and arguments it has prepared briefs it has continually assaulted the ears of officialdom on both sides of the Atlantic and finally after many discouraging set-backs in spite of constant charge of alarmism it has carried its point with the very group who are charged with the conduct of the war -the Joint Chiefs of Staff in Washington. This indeed throws into relief the greatest task which lies ahead for S.O.E. in the Western Hemisphere. It is the work of educating guiding and cooperating with the Americans in our common aim of preserving South America as an invaluable asset to the democratic cause and in preventing our enemies from gaining control of any part of its territory or economy., 3. Minorities  i General The United States of America with thirty or more millions of its inhabitants of Central and Eastern European descent constitutes a peculiar link with Europe. These immigrants and their descendants left Europe because they were hungry or oppressed there. They found in the new country freedom and material well-being. Psychologically they were not willing to be entangled again in European affairs. At the same time a deep affection for the Mother Country remained in the hearts of these people. These two opposing elements created a particularly delicate and difficult situation. On the other hand the war brought to the shores of the U.S.A. and particularly to New York and to Chicago leaders and prominent figures from all European countries which were overrun by the Nazis. This political emigration made the United States a unique centre for the political organization of the resistance movement in Europe with which it continued its contacts. Although removed by thousands of miles of ocean New York and Chicago remain the unquestionable centres of anti- Nazi activities outside Europe. The more so as all contacts with European national minorities and European political refugees in Central and South Americas went through New York.  This situation laid down the first and main objective of this Section viz. To initiate and develop contacts with the national minorities to cultivate contacts with the leaders of the various resistance movements. It was only through these channels that reliable recruits could be found for infiltration into Europe because men who are well-known to their political friends and what is more who are experienced in underground work were obviously the most desirable  candidates., The great majority of Americans of European descent belonged to the working class. A considerable number of them were still technically aliens but they were all members of working class organizations. Thus the political climate of these organizations and in particular of the two most powerful of them -The Associated Federation of labor and the Congress of Industrial Organizations -required also immediate attention. In the beginning of 1941 when the Section started its work isolationist'tendencies were still very strong and up to Germany1s attack on Russia in June we may even say that they prevailed. Two powerful groups one united by national the other by historical ties stood out among the isolationists the Irish-Americans and the American Legion. The Section also had to deal with them.  Apart from searching for and finding personal contacts wdth leading members of national groups the Section tried to consolidate the result of its work by a supporting in each national group such elements who were considered most favourable for the purpose of organizing recruits and b ty helping them to eliminate Nazi influences and to fight sabotage tendencies.   ii Groups  a ITALIANS The Section encouraged and used the work of the Mazzini Society which represents the most active anti-Fascist element among the Italians. It fought the powerful Fascist-Italian press Generose Pope . It explored the possibility of obtaining recruits and carried out various particular assignments as instructed ty London -e.g. Mission of E.Lussu mission to the prisoners of war in India etc. Free Italian organizations were started in Argentina and Brazil where members of the Mazzini Society were sent ty  G. Italian sections of working-men organizations particularly in New England, and in the Middle West were successfully penetrated. Mazzini News a weekly bulletin which afterwards developed into a weekly paper  Nazioni Unite was subsidized and encouaged. Activity and movement of Mazzini leaders was facilitated by G with the U.S.Authorities and enabled many anti-Fascist lectures to be held by them.   b FRENCH Close contact was kept with the Free French and with the various groups who although they did not join the Free French were associated with resistance organizations in France. The French Socialist group FRANCE SPEAKSl and the Catholic Trade Unionist have been particularly helpful.  c HUNGARIANS Early in 1940 the situation among the American-Hungarians was extremely unsatisfactory -the major Hungarian organization The American- Hungarian Federation -being controlled by open or crypto-Fascists. The democratic elements were weak and had no leadership. The Hungarian press was practically controlled by the Hungarian Legation. To look for recruits who were badly wanted seemed pretty hopeless. This Section started a news bulletin Igazmondo which successfully fought against a storm of opposition and vituperation in favour of a definite break with Horthy and his crowd. It fought Eckhardt who was considered to be acting in the interest of the Budapest Government.  The Section is grateful for the encouragement Igazmondo found in London and was sorry to let it-go as part of the policy it had to adopt after Pearl Harbour.  Nevertheless Eckhardt was finally dislodged. The American-Hungarian Federation came out with an anti-Nazi declaration. A few Hungarian recruits were found and several others are under consideration.  In this -as in other matters -the Section was consulted ty the British Embassy concerning the question of the recognition of a Hungarian Free Movement,  d UKRAINIANS The Ulcrainian population in the United States of America has been for the past fifteen years under the distinct influence of Nazi-directed organizations. The G organization contacted the only non- Communict Democratic body -The Defense of the Ujcraine -which it was thought might be useful and for a short time subsidized a bi-weekly bulletin  Gromadsky Golos . The group has good contacts with the Ukrainians in oanada and in South America and powerfully helped by the influence of America entry into the war is making good progress in destroying the German influences. The Section collected valuable information for S.I.S. andalso assisted the American Authorities in certain confidential matters -e.g. in the matter of Father Pelipenko.   e YUGOSLAVS The Section started its work by assisting the fight against the Pavelitch groups among the Croats. -4 was instrumental in killing the influence of Ante Doehen and collected evidence against him for the American authorities. The Section subsidised the publication of the Slavonic Bulletin and of Nova Yugoslavia and through these publications came into contact with elements from which recruits for Europe were obtained. It contacted the various Yugoslav Ministers now in the U.S.A. particularly with a view of smoothing down the difficulties which arose between the Serbs and Croats. There again the Section found support from the Embassies and the Miniform Services.   f CZECHQ-SLQVAKS The Section works in close contact with the Czecho slovak Secret Services and obtains valuable information from them. It was instrumental in assisting the non-re-election of the separatist members of the Board of Directors of the Slovak Federation in August 1941 It has been following the activities of Dr.Hodza and the attempt to form a SlovalcHorthy- Habsburg bloc.,  รยง POLES The Section works in close contact with the Polish Secret Services. It also contacts the useful group of Polish Socialists composed  of recent refugees from Poland -they support the Sikorski Government are on better terms with the Russians than the other Polish groups and a valuable contact with their comrades in Poland.   h BULGARIANS The Section as instructed contacted Todoroff and Stoyanoff and arranged for their despatch to Cairo. It has now under consideration a number of Bulgarian recruits found by Todoroff in Canada.  i ROUMANIANS Section was busy in counteracting the pro-Carolist group. It was in contact with a number of pro-Allied Roumanians with Davila at the head and has established contacts in South America through which it expects to get further news about Maniu and his group. It has been throughout in close touch with the British Embassy on these matters.  j GREEKS Contacts have been made with Venizelos and anti-Metaxa Greeks. The Section was engaged in counteracting anti-British intrigues which emanate from certain Greek elements.  k LITHUANIANS The Section maintained contact with various potential f  leaders and exerted Its influence in reconciling in one committee the opposing national groups -with a view of eliminating the influence of the pro-German Smetona group.   l FINNS The Section maintained close contact with and encouraged the resistance of the pro-Democratic nationals who are opposed to the Nazi tone of the official representation.  m SCANDINAVIANS Close contact was established with those in charge of Danish and Norwegian Free groups. Recruiting was not pursued in this group on London's instructions but could be taken if so desired.  S.O.E. is kept fully informed on the cautious journey along a strictly neutral path of different Swedish elements.,  n SPANISH As Spanish recruits were not required and the Falange activities were studies ty S.I.S. this Section restricted itself to keeping in contact with prominent Spaniards of various groups Republicans Basques Monarchists. The Section is engaged in preparing to mobilize the facilities which exist in Mexico and in Buenos Aires in order to find through its Spanish friends recruits among the former non-Spanish members of the Foreign Spanish Legion. An important plan to this effect is in preparation for Mexico where the auspices appear to be favourable. The Section was also interested with the assistance to be given to Steven and Marshall who were here on a special mission.  รยฐ AUSTRIANS The Section's contacts were with the non-party antilegitimist  Austrian Action and with the Austrian Socialists. Austrian Action has been for a time subsidized by S.O.E. It prepared for flans Sailer's departure for Cairo which is still under discussion.  The Section is studying the possibilities of finding recruits in South America by way of organizing anti-Nazi Austrians there under  Austrian Action .  It was also responsible for counteracting the rumour that the Habsburg restoration was favoured by H.M.G. A rumour which caused consid erable disturbance to the U.S.Authorities.   p GERMANS No activity has been undertaken among the Germans although contacts exist with most of the German groups.  q RUSSIANS Sincd the attack on Russia S.O.E. abandoned most of the Russian contacts as the dwindling minority of White Russians who remained loyal to the Germans could easily be handled by the police. S.O.E. had no Russian recruits to look for S.0.purposes and activity was restricted to political intelligence concerning the attitude of the representatives of the Soviet Government., 31.  iii South America The Section considers that S.O. work among the minorities a the Yugoslavs in Chile b the Poles in Brazil c the Italians and Spaniards in Argentina d the Spaniards and members of the International Brigade in Mexico indicating only the more important groups is of great immediate and practical importance. This work has to be planned from New York which remains the centre of foreign national aspirations and where the more prominent leaders are concentrated.  S.O.E. has agreed with the Canadian Authorities to extend the Section's work to Canada. The foreign groups in Canada present the same problems as they do in the U.S.A.. They usually are grouped in organizationswhich are either parts of a larger American organization or are permeated with the same principles. The Ukrainians present particularly a question in point.  Recruiting work in Canada has already started and considerable results are expected.   iv Labour The Section took an interest in contacts with the Labour movement in view of the large influence of isolationist tendencies and of the danger of wide-scale sabotage activities. Since December 1941 this is no longer S.O.E's work but the contacts which have been developed in the C.I.O. and the A.F. of L. and among influential labour journalists and trade union leaders remain valuable and the Section uses them i.e. -for the passing on of information on  British Labour questions which are constantly in demand.   v Irish Americans The Section has also prepared detailed reports on the Irish-American question and was responsible for the activity of the anti-isolationist league to Defend Ireland . Unfortunately the work had also to be dropped after Pearl Harbour., 32   vi Recent Developemeuts America's entry into the war and S.O.S's association with Col. Donovan has considerably altered methods of working without modifying in any substantial mannerthe purposes thereof.  The Section had to drop its direct activities insofar as they were conducted by its agents. But it was successful in having all its agents accepted and taken over by the Co-Ordinator of Information to work with them and whose instructions are prepared in consulati n with this Section. Owing to Col.Donovan's position in the U.S.A. Administration it is thus possible to have S.O.E's ideas accepted and carried out by the Administration to which they are submitted by the Colonel.  For example  a G's anxieties as to Tibor Eckhardt's the Co-Ordinator of Information and notwithstanding the support which Eckhardt had .from several influential members of the U.S.State Department S.O.E.finally succeeded in getting the Americans to abandonthe idea of an official support for his Movement. b G was able through Colonel Donovan to persuade Mr.Sumner Welles to take up the question of the Serb agitation against the Croats. c G succeeded through Colonel Donovan in getting the War Department to agree to include non-resident aliens in the application of the Selective Draft Act if so requested by Colonel Donovan which means that persons coming into the U.S.A. illegally or residing here illegally can be accepted as S.O.recruits., 33 The Section is in day-to-day confc ct with the S.O.Foreign Nationalities Research and Analysis Sections of Colonel Donovan's organization and through them with other departments which are engaged in similar activities and the work is proceeding in perfect and absolute harmony.  The Co-Ordinator of Information continues to use G specialists in recruiting and as agreed is passing to him all its recruits in the U.S.A and such of its recruits in Canada and South America as it is considered necessary.  Although the Co-Ordinator of Information has been able to introduce Colonel Donovan's officers at their request to its various contacts among the prominent leaders of national and refugee groups it is naturally continuing and developing its own contacts in this direction being still convinced that a close contact with Free Movements is important for keeping alive in enemy-occupied countries a spirit of resistance and for the encouragement of civil disobedience or acts of sabotage calculated to hinder German military and economic interests should not be under-estimated.  The G.organization is to study and follow closely the formation of every political and social movement in the various national minorities which reflects analogous political or social processes in the home country. They will present an important political instrument for use after the war or maybe even at some favourable period during the war. It is a reasonable assumption that the social structure of most European countries after the war will be different from that of the pre-war period. Movements and forces that will play their part in bringing about the changes are already at work. T ey are likely to be a perceptible factor in the closing stages of the war., 34.  vii Future Possibilities British interest in the National minorities and the Free Movements is incomparably greater than that of the U.S.A. Great Britain is and remains a European power and is directly and immediately dependent on the conditions of the Continent of Europe whereas the U.S.A. has the choice between an active participation in European affairs or a gradual withdrawal from Europe as she did after the first World War. In the words of Vernon Bartlett Only if we in Britaiii could be completely indifferent to a Continent completely under German control could we afford to neglect develop ment in Central Eastern-Europe . By force of circumstances the great majority of political leaders of the European countries who were able to escape from the Germans are now in the Americas mainly in the U.S.A. but also in Latin-America and Canada. They are the people who are closely connected with the various resistance movements in the home countries. T ey are the organizers of various Free Movements or other groups which rally the anti-Nazi elements in each racial unit. It is the task of S.O.E. to be in close contact with them to -study their desiderata to assist them to lead them in the erection of our policies to work for stronger unity within each such group.  The European countries in the persons of their best representatives look to England and notwithstanding all the fables about Perfide Albion they trust England. They trust her more than they do Russia more than they do the United States. The elements of social revolution inherent in the Russian situation frightens them the post-war policy of the United States does not inspire confidence. All these countries and people look up to England for leadership they expect it and demand it. They are only too willing to rally round England in the settlement of post-war problems. A great opportunity is thus open to S.O.E. and it will depend on S.O.E.'s policy whether it is seized or thrown away., 4 Political Warfare Except Far East   i Foundation. The history of the GP Section dates from March of 1941 when it was decided to set up a special section to deal with PWE functions S0.1 as they were then called as distinct from the physical operation of SO.2. The following report should therefore be read as the comparatively short history of a fifteen months old organization. In its foundations in the U.S. the SO organization consisted of two people G100 and G1Q1. By March 1941 G101 had been placed in charge of the PVffl section. This was followed shortly afterwards by the appointment of G500 to control PWE activities to the Far East.  From the outset it was felt the work of GP in the Western Hemi sphere was to implement the work of P JE itself not only by sending home all kinds of information of value to PWE but also in organizing political warfare from the Western Hemisphere to Europe in the form of rumours letters pamphlets proclamations and broadcasts. It was also felt that this propaganda would be all the more effective if it came ostensibly as American propaganda. The obvious conclusion was that it would have to be subsidized and organized secretly. This was done by the use of  a large number of intermediaries.   ii Broadcasting. Negotiations were made through intermed iaries with WRUL the shortwave radio station in Boston which was then the most powerful shortwave station in the U.S. and the one with the largest European listening audience. Broadcasts were organized as follows  each group indicates a different intermediary  i French German and Serbo-Croatian to Europe.  ii French Classical Arabic Egyptian Arabic Turkish Roumanian Persian Vfalaff and Soussou to North Africa and the Middle East.  iii Spanish and Portuguese, 36   iv Swedish to  v Italian to  vi Greek to Greece. At this stage it became difficult for obvious reasons of time to squeeze further broadcasts to Europe on to the air over YiRUL and neg otiations were now opened with a number of other stations in the U.S. notably with WGEA and WGEO the General Electric stations in Schenectady and with WLIO the Crossley station in Cincinnati. By this time however the U.S. Administration had awakened to the fact that short-wave was a weapon of war and it began negotiations through various channels with all companies owning short-wave radio stations.   iii Pressure been organized satisfactorily it was felt that a more indirect form of propaganda should be brbught to bear. Other intermediaries were there fore contacted for the creation of various American organizations. One after another the following were either revivified or created by the GP Section  i The Non-Sectarian Anti-Nazi League.  ii The Council for Democracy.  iii T  iv C  v C Each of these had separate functions but in general their functions were a to attack 'the enemy within i.e. the Isolationists appeasers pro-Germans pro-Italians and pro-Japanese b to sponsor proclamations and print propaganda to Europe.  The Non-Sectarian Anti-Nazi League was used principally in the most active fMd of attacking and labelling such isolationists as Lindbergh Wheeler and Nye. It produced a variety of pamphlets many millions of which were distributed throughout the U.S. Its most notable, achievement was the campaign concerning Lindbergh and his German decorations. The Council for Democracy and the League for Human Rights were used on the higher plane principally as the organizers of pro-British anti-isolationist meetings. The Council for Democracy specialized on research among the various minorities in the U.S. and survives to this day as a powerful organ ization although no longer with such intimate connections with us.  The principal achievement of the League for Human Rights in the pamphlet field was a leaflet entitled Their Aims -Our Aims which contrasted Allied and Nazi doctrine. More than 8 000 000 of these were printed and distributed throughout the U.S.  Through the League for Human Rights an approach was made to the American Federation of Labour since it was felt that not enough had been done to win over the working masses to the support of Britain. At this stage it must be remembered that Russia was still neutral and that the communists were urging a violent campaign against us mainly through the CIO and the more radical AFL Unions.  However a contact was established with William GREEN Head of the Ab'L and with his principal lieutenant Matthew W0LL and by mid-summer the Committee for American Labour to Aid British Labour had been estab lished and had held several mass meetings.  The Committee for Inter-American Co-operation was founded when the GP Section began to launch into activities in South America when it was felt that some other form of American sponsorship would have to be found. Xhis organization was principally concerned with transmitting into Spanish and Portuguese the various pamphlets which were produced by the other American organizations. Thus for example two million copies of Their Aims -Our Aims were distributed in South America -1 500 000 r in Spanish and 500 000 in Portuguese. Similarly about 1 000 000 copies of G500 s pamphlet German Fifth Column in Japan were also printed and  % distributed. In all the above cases it must be emphasized that at no time was, the hand of Britain suspected in any of these operations. No British subject was on the committees of any of these organizations and no British subject was even used as an intermediary. To this day the American authorities have no suspicion that these organizations are or were ever anything but IOC American. This can be gauged from the fact that the President himself is now sponsoring a drive by the Committee for American Labour to Aid British Labour to raise 5 000 000 for United Nations War Relief.  Two examples of this Section s work may be recorded in a Dr. Kurt Rieth and b I.G. Farbenindustrie.   a Dr. Kurt RIETH This gentleman it may be recalled was the German diplomat who in 1934 was charged with doing Nazi propaganda work leading up to the assassination of Chancellor D0LLFUSS of Austria. He arrived in the U.S. at the end of March 1941 with the double mission of attempting to buy up American-owned oil properties in Eastern Europe on the one hand and contacting all U.S. political groups favouring isolation on the other the latter in an attempt to hinder application of the Lend- Lease Bill. He was in close contact with leading officials of the Standard Oil Co. which has occupied the lime-light itself recently for its pro-German activities. Fortunately Dr. RIETH received the attention of S.I.S. on arrival in Texas and by the third week in May an imposing document on his activities was handed to the G. organization for appropriate action.  A press campaign was made on an extensive scale by first breaking the story as an exclusive to the New York Herald Tribune and then by feeding out other angles to other newspapers and news agencies.  RIETH was pestered by newspapers for ten days at the end of which he was taken into custody by the FBI and was later expelled from the country.   b I.G. Farhe industr e. The campaign against I.G. Farben was opened in November 1940 after months of research on the ramifications of this amazing and powerful German network. At the time of course the, 39. United States were still neutral and it had so far been impossibe to convince the U.S authorities of the amount of harm the I.G. Farben was doing especially through its connections with the various companies of Standard Oil. The only alternative therefore was to force action through public opinion and on the basis of information collected and collated by SIS the campaign was begun in the middle of November in the U.S. and in Brazil Colombia Venezuda Ecuador and Uruguay. Two weeks later the campaign bore fruit. The Vice-President of Farben's U.S. company was a German named WILHELM VON RATH a naturalised American. Rath had done espionage work for Germany in the U.S.A. in the last war when he was a Commercial Counsellor at the German Embassy in Washington and after the entry of the U.S. into the war in 1917 he had transferred his activities to Switzerland where he had worked for a time with the Head of the German Intelligence Service there.  Now an American citizen a wealthy man and a member of all the best clubs in New lork he was possibly the guiding brain behind the activities of Farben in the U.S. Two weeks of pressure propaganda in which his name and activities were publicized considerably brought about his resig nation from the company at the beginning of December.  The campaign was continued for some weeks and led to much public washing of dirty linen in the late spring of this year as far as the nefarious work of Standard Oil was concerned. As to the Farben interests in the U.S. they were of course taken over by nominees of the U.S. authorities.     iv Verbal Propaganda. The organization of rumours was undertaken on a large scale. A distinction was made between rumours which were intended to be spread by word of mouth and those which could be printed. As regards the former a large organization was already at hand through the various organizations controlled by Security Coordination. These consisted of an extensive organization on the waterfronts of all the principal ports in the U.Sj inspectors in all industrial centres spreading down to each factory working on war orders for Britain also observers and agents in all the principal ports of Central and South, 40. America. It was thus possible to spread a rumour throughbut the length  and breadth of the U.S. within a few hours and more important still to  shut off a rumour at any given level of the social strata.  As regards written rumours a new type of organization was set up. It was realized that any story which had a British or Allied date-line would find no credible audience inside enemy territory itself. Through an intermediary control was therefore obtained over a small American new agency and rumours were supplied to this agency written up in the form of news stories under neutral date-lines. These were then issued to the agency s subscribers. On publication they were at once broadcast over the short-wave to whatever country was indicated as a target. Here a certain amount of speed and coordination were essential in noting publi cation and sending the clipping immediately to the intermediary for that particular language broadcast but this was soon attained to such a point that London noted these rumours were penetrating the target country a fortnight ahead of the same rumour which had been given direct European circulation.  At the same time every effort was made to ensure a wide range of customers for this news agency. Particular attention was paid to the foreign language press and within a few months the agency had almost a complete monopoly among the Polish press and a wide range of customers among Serbian Croatian Hungarian and Czech papers.   v Expansion. G101 visited London at the end of July 1941. During this visit it was decided that the activities of GP Section were to be greatly expanded along with those of all the other S.O.E. sections in New York. From a staff of two G101 and G500 it was decided that GP should expand to at least ten. Unfortunately however suitable recruits were not forthcoming from London. By the beginning of September it was decided to find these in Canada.  By the beginning of October suitable Canadian recruits were found, 41. and were taken on.  A wide expansion of work was then begun. By far the major proportion of the work of course was taken up in advising and guiding the propaganda section in Colonel Donovan s organization. Colonel Donovan set up his organization in the summer of 1941 andcfesignated his Foreign Information Services for political warfare work. Inevitably it met with all the diffi culties which any new organization encounters from vested interests and the prejudices of settled minds. Its chief pre-occupation was with the short wave. Unli&e Great Britain the U.S. radio stations are privately owned. To the large chains such as the National Broadcasting Company and the Columbia Broadcasting System the short-wave was an expensive luxury since it carried no advertising revenue. To others such as GEC and Crossley it was merely a medium for experiments and testing appaiEtus. Only WRUL on the East Coast and KGEI on the West Coast were concerned with political warfare over the short-wave and even these would have been in the elementary stages if it had not been for the concentrated work which the G organization liad put in in the first half of the year.  Robert SHERWOOD Head of the Foreign Information Services soon found he had an impossible job-on his hands in trying to bring these irresponsible companies to heel. Conditions were chaotic. With the exception of WROL and KGEI no station had efficient translators. They had no sense of timing their new broadcasts. CBS for example broadcast the same news schedule to France several times the same day without any alteration. NBC refused to accept an offer of translators. When approached directly all of them even including WRUL refused to accept the FIS directives -though WRUL hah been innocently accepting PWE directives through SOE for some months not knowing of course that these came from Britain.  Sherwood asked for G8s help and the solution was fairly obvious. The G organization placed its whole radio organization at his disposal inter mediaries news gatherers translators and broadcasters. For many months while the negotiations between the American authorities and the short-wave stations were proceeding TOUL was unwittingly doing FIS work through, SOE s radio personnel on to their payroll. Similarly many of the keener kinds who had found their way into such organizations as the Council for Democracy also became paid officials of FIS when America entered the war.  As regards actual operations in the U.S. after December 7 1941 there fore the GP Section was reduced to a skeleton organization whose functions were   i Intense liaison on behalf of PWE with the FIS  ii Supplying material of all kinds to PWE in London As regards co-operation with the FIS the officers in GP Section developed an intimate liaison with the key men in Sherwood's organization namely with Joseph BASHES Head of the Radio Section with Edward STAHELI Head of the Publication Section with Edd. JOHNSON Head of the Radio Monitoring Section while G101 kept in close touch with Sherwood and Edmond TAYLOR his principal assistant. G was thus able to give the FIS great help in a variety of ways -directives when they could get none from their own State Department broadcasters when they could find none themselves intelligence material on conditions in Europe which they could not obtain from any American authority. It was also able to steer them round many a nasty corner by allowing them the use of SOE cable facilities to London for communication with PWE through their office there in order to discuss any matter which they wished to be a secret between themselves and SOE  the FIS cable system is open to inspection by the State Department ., Indeed if it had not been for the presence of S.O.E. in New York it is very probable that FIS would not have survived the first six months of its existence certainly it would not be in nearly such a healthy state as it is at present.  At the same time SOE has endeavoured to be the eyes and ears of PWE in this country. Thanks to the fact that both SIS and SOE are under G in this country SOE has access to exceptional sources of information. Approximately 10 reports have been sent home each week on conditions in Europe all of these obtained from SIS which not only has its own organization but which also maintains a close liaison with its American colleagues. All travellers from Europe were interrogated their reports were correlated compared with other reports and then sent to London.  After Pearl Harbour a new activity was undertaken. On De cember 7 1941 it was generally believed that the war would main tain American morale at a satisfactory level and that there was now no further need for British propaganda in the U.S. While unable to do any such propaganda itself however G organization deplored any attempt to reduce British Information Services in this country and believed that the results could only be disastrous.  At the same time there was no method of proving this view was correctj such reports as there were on American public feel ing were devoted either to analysis of the various radio commenta tors or to the press and no attempt had so far been made by any authority either British or American to follow these through to the broad masses beneath. At the same time there were an enormous number of suspicious publications some of them notorious such as the Chicago Tribune others scarcely known outside their own locality.  The G organization therefore set itself the task of making a study of all Fifth Column publications most of which it was sus pected were carrying out active propaganda either wittingly or un wittingly. A large list of these was obtained. A further list was, obtained from the Council for Democracy and the study began. Com parisons were made with Axis short-wave radio broadcosts which it was felt were intended as directives to these publications. Simultaneous ly through intermediaries the G organization conducted a secret pub lic opinion poll on certain fixed questions which were posed at inter vals of a fortnight. Within four months after Pearl Harbour this pub lic opinion poll revealed that pro-British feeling in the U.S. had dropped to 49 of the population the lowest ebb on record. It is true that this drop was partly due to British military reverses but it is also true that these reverses were exploited on an enormous scale by the Fifth Column publications.  At the same time GP began showing these fortnightly reports to Sherwood. He was so interested that he showed them to the President himself. The reaction was remarkable. The President used a large por tion of one of these reports in his speech on February 25th when he lashed out at poison-peddlers of rumours and untruths . Simultaneous ly he gave emphatic instructions to the responsible authorities that stern action must be taken against these publications which had so far considered themselves immune under the right of free speech. Since such high quarters were taking action on these continuing reports it was felt that correspondingly high quarters in England might also be interested in seeing them in order to coordinate action wherever pos sible. Accordingly a telegram was sent to C.D. advising him of this and it was decided that henceforth a regular telegram should be sent home for C.D. for his information.  By the end of April there was so much action against these Fifth Columnists that it became difficult to trace it all. Public opi nion was prepared for the action by a nation-wide campaign in the press and over the radio which continued at full blast for several weeks and which is still rumbling even now. 57 000 people were inspired to sign a petition for the suppression of Father COUGHLIN'S Social Justice ., Jt was banned from the mails. William Dudley PELLEY1s notorious weekly   The Gallilean was also banned from the mails. Through some oversight  the authorities omitted to take action against his monthly edition but  this was pointed out in G.P.'s next report which went to the President and the necessary action was promptly taken. Two notorious West Coast  propagandists NOBLE and JONES were arrested on charges of having slan dered General MacAHTHUR and face 15 years imprisonment. Court ASHER  publisher of X-Ray faces a charge of sedition and so on. The rest  of them ran for cover and by the beginning of May even the all-powerful Colonel McCORMICK confessed that he felt by no means secure from the F.B.I  three of whose officers had just examined the Chicago Tribune records. At this time the public opinion poll revealed that pro-British feeling had risen to 65/o. At this satisfactory level the G.P. Section felt it could for the time being at least abandon the very intensive work which these reports involved and could confine itself to the secret public opinion poll.  The whole project described above from Pearl Harbour to date has cost approximately 5 000  a small enough amount when it is realiz ed that in that period approximately 20 000 000 Americans were persuaded to change their minds in favour of Britain by the simple expedient of driving out of existence those Fifth Column publications which had kept them on the other side of the fence.  The accompanying chart explains the functions of the G.P. section.   VI Conclusion The question of PWE representation in this country is still undecided but it is felt most strongly that whatever form this takes it should not be allowed to develop into solely overt activities. In political warfare the Americans have found a weapon which has aroused their interest and enthusiasm. Whatever the future of British political warfare is the Americans will launch into it and will develop its secret forms with all their energy and with all the great resources at their command, The G organization has harnessed these resources and this energy and to a large measure now controls them. If they pass out of British control American psychological warfare may easily develop into a weapon which will eventually become a serious embarrassment to ourselves, 47. 5. Far East . Political Warfare .  I Beginning. The first attempt to organize Far Eastern Political Warfare on the American continent dates back to a 2 300 word telegram sent in August 1940 by H.M. Ambassador in Tokyo to H.M. Ambassador in Washington. This telegram which was drafted by H. V. Redman M.O.I. representative in Japan and G500 then S.I.S. representative operating in Japan under a propaganda cover comprised a condensed summary of German subversive activities in Japan. It had been preceded by telegrams requesting that H.M. Embassy in Washington should secretly arrange for this material to be published in the U.S. press as a series of articles written by an American author and quoting American sources. No action was taken in this matter by H.M. Embassy Washington. Late in April 1941 G500 arrived in U.S.A. en route to the Far East to take up a political warfare post with S.O. Singapore. After consultation with G in New York and investigations on the West Coast it was decided however that G500 should remain in U.S.A. to organize Far Eastern Political Warfare on this continent. This decision was based on a conviction that Japanese action in the Far East would be conditioned by the attitude of the United States towards Japanese aggression it was necessary therefore to attempt to influence Japan by material published in the U.S. press and by U.S. broadcasts to the Far East. As a corollary it was necessary to influence United States public opinion concerning Far Eastern affairs. Another important aspect of political warfare to Japan was the fact that material concerning German subversive activities published in British or Allied territory unless derived from American sources would largely be discounted as propaganda whereas not only was U.S. a neutral country but both American 8 ess correspondents and American shortwave broadcasting stations enjoyed a reputation for objectivity. Obviously American broadcasts re-broadcast from Singapore and elsewhere in the Far East would be of more value as propaganda than anything which might emanate from British or Allied sources. For these and other reasons it was decided that New York and not Singapore should be the main base for political warfare directed against Japan. In May 1940 therefore plans were laid to conduct Far Eastern, Political Warfare operations in the United States. This section G.O.3 was formed by G500 for this purpose. The operations envisaged were greatlyexpanded and in July G500's temporary attachment to the G organization in New York was made permanent.  ii Policy. Policy was based on the plan for subversive propaganda to Japan prepared for S.O.E. London by G500 in March 1941. The following comprises the main objectives and themes - A. Objectives a to bring about a rupture in relations between Germany and Japarj b to damage Japanese morale by creating internal dissensions c to divert Japanese xenophobia into a hatred of Germans d to stiffen resistance throughout the Far East to Japanese aggression e to stiffen United States resistance to Japanewe aggression.  B. Themes 1. To Japan a German espionage Fifth Column and other subversive activities in Japan b Propaganda directed against the revolutionary activities of the Japanese Militarist-Fascist cliques c actual and potential strength of America and her determination  to resist Japanese aggression. Unity of ABCD Powers 2. To the a As in c above. Far East. b Propaganda directed against the Japanese conception of a   Greater East Asia Co-prosperity Sphere . The main target however was Japan the main preoccupation was to introduce subversive propaganda material into Japan and the main weapon used was anti-German and anti-Japanese Militarist-fascist material.   iii Propaganda Channels. The following channels were used 1. In U.S.A a Publication in U.S. Press of news stories articles cartoons and items by commentators. b internal broadcasts in U.S., c shortwave broadcasts in various languages beamed to the Far East  d special daily news service from Singapore  'III e publication and distribution of pamphlets in English f publication and distribution of pamphlets in Japanese   rfs  among Japanese communities in U.S. g rumours.  2. In Latin a re-publication America. and news stories already published in U.S.A. b broadcasts beamed from U.S.A. c internal broadcasts d distribution of pamphlets in English Spanish and Portu  guese  e distribution of pamphlets in Japanese to Japanese com munities. This operation which was in its initial stages was stopped by the entry of America into the wap  f news service from U.S.A. g rumours.  3. Philippines Distribution of pamphlets in English and Japanese and Hawaii. 4. The Far East a re-broadcasts in various languages of American programmes  arranged through S.O. Singapore at our request . b re-publication in various languages and distribution by  S.O. Singapore of articles and pamphlets produced in U.S.A. by Section G.0.3 c inspired despatches frcm United States correspondents in Shanghai arranged by S.O.E. London and/or S.O. Singapore at the request of Section G.0.3.   iv Operations. It was decided at the outset that an essential prerequisite for success was complete secrecy. If the material published had been traced to British sources and to British finance not merely would, 50. its value have been destroyed but the position of the G organization would have been jeopardized and the British cause in this country would have been seriously affected. It must be remembered that a major ob jective of Axis and Isolationist endeavour in U.S. prior to Pearl Harbour was to expose subversive British propaganda activities. Owing to the talkativeness of Americans in general and American journalists in par ticular this imposed a severe handicap on operations.  In pursuance of this policy the organization of Section G.0.3 the methods used and the Agents and informants employed were almost without exception different from those of the G.P. Section.  In addition to other activities an Intelligence service in the  U.S. employing a number of Asiatic and non-Asiatic agents and informants was built up during the few months preceding the attack on Pearl Harbour. Direct contacts were established with the Japanese Embassy in Washington and the Japanese Consulates in New York and San Francisco which were used both for intelligence purposes and as rumour channels. Other contacts were established with Japanese business circles and among Nisei communities in New York and on the West Coast and Japanese returning from Japan were contacted and questioned. G.500 was also in direct contact with the United States citizen Ambassador vfho was acting as go-between in the secret negotiations betweeryNomura and Cordell Hull which preceded Minister Wakasugi s mission to Tokyo in September 1941 and had the advantage of access to all secret intelligence material relating to the Far East which passed through S.I.S. division of British Security Coordination. These advantages were of invaluable assistance in planning psychological warfare operations. Although the various operations directed from Section G.0.3 were world-wide and on a very large scale it is gratifying to record that, 51. not in one single instance was the agency uncovered or the information traced to British sources.  On more than one occasion the Japanese Ambassador to Washington summoned one of G.500 s agents to discuss material which was being published and it is known that Japanese Consulates in U.S.A. received urgent instructions from Tokyo to find out what organization was behind this political warfare campaign. Reference is also made later in this report to the special section employing ten men which was set up in the headquarters of the Metropolitan Police in Tokyo in the autumn of 1941 to deal with the flood of material on German Fifth Column activities which was pouring into Japan from all over the world and to work out the ramifications of the organization which was trying to break Japanese-German friendship .  It is also of interest to note Chief of the Far Eastern section of the Foreign Qffice who recentlytG headquarters in New' York and examined some of the files relating to Far Eastern political warfare. Mr. Ashley Clarke stated that the Foreign Office were quite unaware of these operations and were in fact extremely puzzled at the time by the apparently spontaneous publication of material all over the world. P.W.E. officials who recently visited U.S.A. were also unaware of Section G.O. 3 s operations.  The following are the principal operations conducted by this Section   a Articles on German Fifth Column Activities in Japan. A reliable and discreet American journalist named C. N. Spinks well-known to G.500 was contacted by him on his arrival from Japan. His knowledge of the written and spoken language and experience both as a student of Japanese politics and as editor of an American newspaper in Japan afforded him the necessary reputation as an authority on Japanese, affairs. H.M. Ambassador s Tokyo Telegram of August 1%0 to Washington referred to above was traced and obtained from the archives of H.M. Embassy. The material contained was edited and written up in the form of an article acceptable to a leading New York newspaper under the signature of the American journalist referred to above. Re-publication rights abroad were secured through another intermediary and it was arranged for a news agency to telegraph the article verbatim to London. S.O.E. London were advised publication date in advance and requested to obtain world-wide radio and press publicity and made the following arrangements   l Publication and editorial comment in the London press f2 Article cabled in full to H.M. Embassy Tokyo who had been warned to expect this material and that some diplomatic advantage might accrue.   3 Article cabled in full to Melbourne repeated to Australia and New Zealand with a cypher message recommending that full summaries should be broadcast on the Australian radio transmissions to Indo-China and Far East.  4 Summary of the article sent in Empax telegrams to Stockholm Helsinki Berne Madrid Tangier Lisbon.  5 The Ministry of Information by agreement with S.O. London took the following further steps  i The article was handed over in full to Reuters for their Far East Service.  ii The B.B.C. and British Official Wireless were warned in advance to expect the article and a copy was passed to them with a strong recommendation that full and early use should be made of it.,  6 On publication in U.S.A. the material contained was quoted extensively in a series of broadcasts to the Far East from K.G.E.I. and was widely used by local radio commentators. Furthermore H.M. Ambassador in Tokyo telegraphed to the Foreign Office l.llJ l that he was convinced that reproduction in Japan of copies and translations of Spinks' and other articles published in foreign countries on Axis Fifth Column work has proved to be one of the best pieces of propaganda work affecting Japan ever done ., 54-   In the meantime arrangements were made by Section  G.O. 3 for the article to be syndicated in forty leading newspapers in the U.S. and in Canada. Similar world-wide distribution by press and radio was obtained for various other articles which first appeared under the signature of American authors in leading U. S. newspapers and  periodicals.   b U. S. broadcasts to the Far East. The services of the General Manager and Chief Engineer of the Malayan Broadcasting Corporation then on leave from Singapore were obtained. Operating under this cover ostensibly to secure re-broadcasting rights for K.G.E.I. programmes the Agent performed excellent work.  Within a few months Station K.G.E.I.. at that time the only U.S. shortwave station broadcasting to the Far East was converted from an anti-British organization broadcasting exclusively Hearst news in English and Chinese only Chinese programmes were entirely unsupervised and we have reason to suspect were being used by the enemy to transmit code messages into a station receiving the following news services  A.P. U.P. Special U. S. Government teletype  services from Washington and New York and  a special S.O. News Service from Singapore and radiating programmes and news commentaries to the Far East in the following languages English Dutch French Chinese Japanese Tagalog Thai and Malay., 55. These programmes were re-broadcast from. Singapore and Australia.  Section G.O. 3 through this Agent acted as intermediaries in the financing and establishment of a new 100 K.W. station KWID in San Francisco. We also acted in the recruitment of broadcasting personnel for this station which is now broadcasting in the above languages to the Far East.  The group who financed KWID are now planning in consultation with G50 000 to erect several additional high-powered transmitters on the West Coast.   c Special News Service from Singapore In order to overcome problems of rapid overt communication between New Toxic and Singapore British and Overseas Features was fomed in New York as a cover organization. An S.O. Agent was appointed as Singapore representative. This arrangement enabled the G organization and S.O. Singapore to transmit as news telegrams material designed for publication in the press or radio either in the Far East or in U.S.A.  The enforced liquidation of British and Overseas Features did not interrupt this service. Section G.O. 3 arranged with the Managing Editor of NEWSWEEK for the appointment of the Singapore Agent as Newsweek representative. Copies of his daily news telegrams were passed by Newsweek to the Foreign Information Services of Colonel Donovan and teletype to KGEI in San Francisco. During the period of Japanese infiltration into French Indo-China these telegrams were considered so valuable by F.I.S. that they were teletype to Washington and handed daily to the President.  This arrangement with Singapore was valuable in many ways. It enabled S.O. Singapore to supply daily the type of material as if from an American correspondent which required wide publicity in the Far Easts the publicity was achieved the following day in the form of U.S. broadcasts from KGEI which were re-broadcast in various languages from Singapore. It provided a quick counter to Japanese radio propaganda and a monitoring service of Japanese domestic broadcasts which cannot be monitored in U.S.A. ., 56.  d Material introduced into Japan In addition to propaganda by shortwave broadcasts in Japanese a great deal of written material was introduced into Japan. Thousands of letters containing material in Japanese were posted from different points and many thousands of pamphlets in Japanese were smuggled on board Japanese ships sailing from ports on the American continent. Possibly the most fruitful means of getting material into Japan however were indirect  a It is certain that every Japanese Consul throughout the world immediately telegraphed to the Gaimusho the contents of articles in the local Press on German Fifth Column activities in Japan and similar subjects. This was a chief reason for endeavouring to secure world-wide publicity and newspaper syndication for material published by Section G.O. 3  b Many thousands of Japanese living abroad and no doubt many hundreds of Germans and Italians with friends in Japan clipped such material from their local newspaper and enclosed it in letters to Japan. The most important single operation conducted in this field however was on a high political leve. A member of the Japanese Diet then visiting Washington was contacted by one of G500's Agents and induced to write some thirty personal letters to influential notabilities in Japan In order to avoid U.S. Latin- American and Japanese censorship the following arrangements were made  a the outer envelope containing the letters was franked and cancelled registered airmail Special Delivery at the Washington post office.  b the package was flown by special courier by arrangement with the White House from Washington to Manj nil.Il o Mexico and handed by delivery boy as if from the Mexican post office to the Captain of a Japanese ship sailing for Japan together with a, 57. personal letter from the Diet member. The individual letters were  sealed stamped and addressed in Japanese. They were posted in Japan by the Ship's captain on his arrival.  These letters were all of similar tenor insomuch as the addressees were exhorted in different ways to bring influence to bear to stamp out the German menace in Japan. Each letter enclosed a copy of a Section G.0.3 pamphlet describing German subversive activities in Japan.   e Miscellaneous Activities These included  i the obtaining of two high-powered transmitters for Singapore as a special Presidential dispensation under Lease-Lend. Fortunately owing to the slow workings of officialdom in London and in Singapore these transmitters were still in U.S.A. on December 7th  ii survey and analysis of all Japanese language newspapers published in U.S.A.  iii investigation and analysis of Japanese propaganda activities in U.S.A. including racial propaganda among Negroes.  iv the inspiration of a Library of Congress investigation of Japanese on the West Coast and the rendering of assistance in this investigation.  v a great deal of material was assembled and fed to various radio commentators in internal broadcasts in U.S.A. Various broadcasts were also made by G.0.3 agents.  vi intelligence reports to London.  vii exchange of information concerning Japanese Intelligence with Colonel Donovan's S.I.S. and the F.B.I.  viii the U.S. authorities were persuaded to check on all orders for radio equipment to prevent supplies reaching the enemy through neutral intermediaries.  ix world-wide publicity for theVapan Indo-China Secret Protocol. Before publication the text of this protocol was passed to the President and to Cordell Hull for use by the latter in the impending Hull/Kurusu conversations. Publicity included commentary, 58. on all shortwave transmissions beamed from the United States to France.   x sponsoring of pamphlets. Sponsoring printing and distribution of pamphlets by patriotic societies and magazines. Pamphlets in Japanese were sponsored by The League of Patriotic Japanese Residing Abroad . Various agents and intermediaries were used but in each case evidence was manufactured to indicate that finance was provided by Japanese elements opposed to the Militarist regime in Japan. V. The Futures The evidence quoted above gives some indication of the effects of Section G.0.3's operations both on internal conditions in Japan and on German-Japanese relations. Owing to an uninterrupted series of phenomenal Japanese victories this undermining of Japanese morale is not apparent but the damage has been done the undermining exists. Overloaded with victory Japanese morale is in an unstable condition it will begin to crack and totter with the first serious defeat sustained by Japan. Because of the dizzy height the Japanese structure has reached the sapping of its foundations will be all the more dangerous and its ultimate collapse more certain and more catastrophic. It is to be hoped that P.W.E. from whom section G.0.3 has received no communications concerning Far Eastern Political Warfare policy or proposed operations in U.S.A. will take advantage  of what has already been accomplished in this field. For a variety of reasons e.g. close personal contacts with F.I.S. officials responsible either for policy or operation the fact that Colonel Donovan s Far Eastern broadcasting organization has been built round Section G.0.3's operations and the fact that the more important work in the preparation and translation of material in Japanese is at present done either by Section G.0.3 on behalf of F.I.S. or by  F.I.S. in consultation with S.O.E. or by personnel largely provided by S.O.E. as in the case of translators and announcers for West Coast broadcasts to the Far East Section G.O.3 is in a position, 59. to exert great influence on all U.S. propaganda and psychological warfare operations directed to the Far East. The Section is also in direct touch with the chiefs of the Psychological Warfare Branch of the U. S. War Department who have requested advice and assistance. This contact can be developed as desired., 60. 6. Intelligence The Intelligence Section was formed in November 1941 for the purpose of collating intelligence and drawing up plans for S. 0. operations in Latin America It was decided that for the sake of convenience the G. I. should summarize all the intelligence relevant to its purposes in files and card-indexes to be kept at the Section s  disposal. This was a task of considerable magnitude and necessi  tated reading many files in the offices of Security Co-Ordination analysing the information contained therein and classifying it under the headings of various agents political personalities organi zations etc. in Latin America. Since this material has been completed it has been the aim of the G. I. Section to keep it thoroughly up-todate. All information concerning Latin American countries that has passed through the hands of G. I. has been digested and recorded.  As a result there are approximately 15 000 cards under serious countries in addition to basic reports on the following countries -Brazilj Central America 2 Chilej The Guianasj Colombiaj Costa Sica Cuba Dominican Republic Ecuador El Sal  vador Guatemala Haiti Honduras Latin American Oil Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay Venezuela Mexico. While this information was being collected various schemes for  S. 0. action in South America were suggested and discussed with the British Embassy in Washington. However it soon became apparent that the State Department was disquieted by the whole prospect of S. 0. activities in Latin America. The uneasiness spring from the opinion widely held in the U. S. A. that Latin America was largely a responsi bility of their own and that any outside interference was calculated to upset their plans. The G. organization on the other hand held that the State Department was ignorant of the dangers that threatened South America and feared that it might also persuade the British Foreign Office that conditions in Latin America were entirely satis factory.  On the realization that S. 0. operations were at least tem porarily suspended it became the aim of G. I. to improve and extend, its intelligence and its knowledge of conditions within the countries in which S. 0. had contemplated operations. Thus should active operations ever be called for the material for their planning would be at hand. At the same time it was agreed that as S. 0. in South America was temporarily in abeyance and as an efficient S. 0. organization had already been built up throughout the territory the various regional sections could be used to good effect by providing intelligence while at the same time perfecting lines of communication etc. within the countries. They had in fact already proved themselves so useful that it was considered worthwhile to continue G. I. Section as an integral part of the G. Organization confining its activities to the collation of this intelligence and turning it to the best possible use within the limits of its present charter.  It would not however be correct to consider G. I. as merely a collator of intelligence received from its representatives in the field since part of its duties has been to supply these representatives with any intelligence that could be obtained from sources other than those local sources with which they were already in contact. Thus many reports from Censorship and other sources have been sent down to the field. 392 reports were sent out to stations in the field as follows  Belize 47 Bogota 73 Buenos Aires 17 Caracas 71 San Jose 15 Havana 3 Lima 77 Mexico 12 Montevideo 3 Quito 40 Recife 1 Rio 12 Santiago 21  The intelligence collected by this Section has also been turned to use by those responsible for Economic Warfare and in some cases   e.g. in the case of Blohm and Company Venezuela it is believed that intelligence provided has proved to be the final charge that, placed the firm on the Black List. Also many reports have been sent  via S.I.S. to the who found these reports extremely useful  and requested their continuation.  These reports have been sent to London. They consist of ex  tensive surveys of conditions in the various Latin American countries covered from as many angles as possible -trade politics strategy espionage etc. The Section is also responsible for various special reports such as that on Japanese activities in various South  American countries which was written and handed to the Japanese Section for transmission to London. Similarly an appreciation of the vital raw materials situation South America was especially  prepared with the help of the Section. This is an analysis of the extent to which the Allies are dependent on Latin American sources for supplies of vital raw materials with particular attention to the possibilities of sabotage to these materials by the enemy., 7 Training  The question of special training was discussed in July 1941 during G'a visit to London. At that time a site in Nova Scotia had been located but it was felt that it was too far from New York eventually another site was located and taken a few miles from Oshawa Ontario on the north shore of Lake Ontario.  A provisional construction budget of 100 000 dollars 110 000 Canadian dollars was sanctioned and building operations commenced in September. It was hoped to open the Camp S.T.S.103 before the end of October but for various reasons this was not found possible until the beginning of December.  The first batch of students consisted of 5 officers from the headquarters staff of SOE/NY who spent from December 9th to 20th at the Camp. Since then the Camp has trained a total of 49 SOE officers 13 SIS officers 27 men from Colonel Donovan s SO organization 4 from his SIS organization 13 from the FBI and 1 from the RCMP a total of 112 students. The SOE officers include all the chief agents from Latin America with one exception.  The Camp was given the name of Special Training School 103-It consisted ofs   a guest house with accommodation for 6 persons either officers or students.  b large building housing the garages heating plant water plant etc.  c main building consisting of officers and students quarters and messes with accommodation for 4 officers and 14 students.  d main administration building comprising 4 offices 1 orderly room 1 large lecture room.  e staff quarters for 8 N.C.O.'s and approximately 30 men.  f cottage for W/T training with classrooms for housing the equipment. On the ground floor of this cottage is the N.C.O.'s and men's canteen.  g new building recently completed houses 2 large transmitters aerials for which are now being erected. This building will also accommodate 6 W/T operators.  h small stone house for storing explosives and incendiary devices., 64.  I revolver range in the men's quarters in which the weapons and ammunition are stored.  j sandbagged hut on the lake shore with bullet-proof windows from which students can observe the effects of explosions etc. A fire whose cause was unknown broke out on the night of April 9th and destroyed the main building consisting of officers' and students quarters. Since then a marquee and two bell tents have been used pending the reconstruction of this building which should be completed by July 10th. Courses at the school consisted of training in Intelligence creation of an SOE organization in the field handling of agents security counter espionage unarmed combat small arms demolitions and incendiarism and  wireless telegraphy.  On ffey 11th 1942 GT 4 arrived in Canada to assist GT3 and GT3 was seconded to Colonel Donovan's organization to instruct his future in structors. GT 4 began his lectures at the school on May 25th but suffered a cerebral haemorrhage on the evening of fey 28th and died in hospital on June 3rd. GT3 was thereupon instructed to return to the school and take over instruction pending the arrival of a successor to  GT4.  The value of the Training School cannot be under-estimated both  in instructing the members of SOE and those of the various American  organizations all of which have been greatly impressed by the efficiency and thoroughness of their courses. An analysis of training undertaken is given in the accompanying table, MALISIS OF TRAINING COMPLETED AT S.T.S.103 from 9th December 1941 to 5th June 1942 inclusive  COURSE NUMBER  1. 2. 3. 4 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. Special  Weekends 2 and 3 day  courses  etc.  1 W/T  2 w/r  DURATION INCLUSIVE  9th to 20th Dec/41  14th to 23rd Dec/41  27th Dec/41 to 5th Jan/42  15th Jan. to 12th Feb/42  25th Feb. to 24th Mar/42  1st to 11th April/42  20th to 29th April/42  7th to 11th May/42  15th to 18th May/42  25th to 29th May/42  1st to 5th June/42  18th May to 2nd June/42  Various  8th April to 2nd May/42  13th Mgy to 13th June/42  SOE STB COLONEL COLONEL FBI RCMP TOTAL DONOVAN S DONOVAN S SO SI 5 5 5 3 3 4 2 7 1 10 2 2 3 7 9 9 1 7 8 5 5 10 5 3 8 2 8 10 1 1 3 3 3 1 2 12 8 8 9 9 54 13 27 4 13 1 112, 8. Washington Office The-Washington office was opened early in October 1941 for the purpose of maintaining liaison with the Co-Ordinator of Information the F. B. I. the British Embassy and the various missions and Government Departments. On November 5th 1941  G.300 was appointed the first S. 0. New York representative. The work in Washington has developed into liaison with the following a The Co-Ordinator of Information    b H.M.Embassy c British Joint Staff Mission and the Joint Intelligence Committee d Psychological Warfare Branch of the U. S.  War Department.  The first and last of these have already been dealt with.  Liaison -with the Embassy has been maintained. Many discussions have taken place with senior members there regarding  activities in Latin America and a considerable amount of information has been made available to us from the telegrams which they receive from Embassies and Legations in Latin America. Liaison with the War Trade Department MEW have also been very close and they have been very helpful tatxxx in supplying G with economic information.  Liaison math the Joint Staff Mission of which the Joint Intelligence Committee is on a reasonably close basis G.300 being G. s personal representative on the Junior Committee. The liaison with the other branches of Joint Staff Mission is now sufficiently intimate for them to visit the Washington office quite automatically should any matters rise in their discussions either amongst them selves or with the Americans which in any way affect S. 0. E.  Brigadier Dykes the British Secretary of the Combined Chiefs of Staff took G.300 to see Brigadier-General Smith the American Secretary of the Combined Chiefs of Staff regarding the question of Latin America -and where he was given an extremely cordial welcome., As a result of this meeting a memorandum was submitted to General Smith as to what S. 0. E. could do if authorized by the Combined Chieftof Staff and their decision in this matter is still awaited. The office is also on close and intimate terms with Commander Coleridge Secretary of British Joint Chief of Staff Brigadier Bourne Chairman of British Joint Planners and several others. A close liaison with the Joint Staff Mission clearly is and will be of the greatest importance when the Co-Ordinator of Information becomes the supporting agency of the American Chief of Staff., 68. 9. Documentary Warfare. The creation of Station M. was one of the natural develop ments of the G.P. Section when it was decided to make a distinction between psychological and physical operations. The usefulness of letter-writing and other documentary work was one of the points in G.P. s program but it was quickly realized that the manufacture of documents was a highly specialized operation demanding all kinds of scientific assistance.  On July 16 1941 a memorandum was sent to London setting forth the proposed functions of Station M. This was approved on August 8th. The Station was set up in Canada for reasons of security and from that time its work was divided between two fields -New York and Toronto a New York.  Planning  1. The collection cataloguing and filing of a mass of papers and exhibits in connection with the work of reproducing documents etc. Through the various censorsliips there were compiled collections of pass ports laissez-passers and other permits passes and personal papers clean notepaper and stationery of every kind with the printed headings of hotels govern ment offices private firms etc used notepaper of enenQr Embassies government offices firms etc. as models for reproduction . Copies of these catalogues  in which every piece bears a key number are sent to London regularly. 2. Actual writing of texts for documents which are sub sequently manufactured in Toronto. Also the writing of material for special propaganda operations such as the  Vik booklet for circulation in South America the Advice to Travellers leaflet etc. 3. General work on subjects of a technical nature -e.g. the possibility of an envelope which could not be opened by, steaming or any other method except cutting and upon a plastic which could be used for the direct reproduction of seals with a view to obviating the laborious process of making plaster casts and from them electros  b Toronto.  The organization was centred round the Scientist who after studying the problem of questioned documents with the R.C.M.P. at Regina was settled in a small laboratory equipped to handle all matters relating to the reproduction of documents. In his spare time this scientist was also engaged in research work on Secret Inks the erasure of inks from passports etc. On the manufacturing side there were paper-makers printers typewriter experts a handwriting expert et 5. These men were sworn in and were not paid.  Aside from these activities a great deal of work was put in on the  Activity Pictures operation. The first examples of this project have provided the basis for making the operation a joint one with Colonel Donovan negotiations for which are still proceeding at the time of writing., V. COMMUNICATIONS 1. London Lagos and Cairo. On its foundation S.O.E. communicated with London via the S.I.S. cables. In September 1941 however S.O.E. set up its own communications using the War Office Cipher. In February 1942 following a visit to New York by W direct communication by the same cipher was established with Lagos thus wiping out a great deal of delay in fulfilling the requests which Lagos was increasingly making on this station.  In May 1942 direct communication was also established with Cairo the procedure being that on matters of policy Cairo would telegraph direct to London repeating to New York and on matters affecting the movements of personnel between Cairo and the United States direct to New York repeating to London.  2. Latin America. In Central America the L.M.T. code is now used in conjunction with one-time pads. Every other territory possesses at least one agent with official cover or access to an extra-territorial office who is in charge of a War Office cipher and in direct communication with New York. In addition intcr-and intra-territorial communications have been established wherever they serve a useful purpose and in Brazil there are  S.O. agents with direct communication with New York in Recife Sao Paulo and Curityba as well as in the capital. 3. North America. Communication with the Washington Office and with the National Research Council in Ottawa is maintained by the Telekrypton machine which automatically ciphers and deciphers messages under conditions of complete security. This has greatly reduced the length of time which it previously took to transmit messages by the cumbersome safe hand method twenty-four hours to Washington two days to Ottawa. Trans mission and reception are simultaneous by the Telekrypton., VI. FINANCE and RECORDS 1. Accounts. The accounts of the G. organization aye kept by competent officers attached for the purpose. The accompanying diagram explains the allocation of expenditure by divisions and sections together with relative percentages.  In this connection it should be noted that London and other  S.O.E. stations abroad have now adopted the system of asking New York to purchase and despatch material to them. In addition to this many S.O.E. agents in various parts of the world have dependents in this country to whom they have arranged to have part of their salaries paid. At the time of writing S.O.E. New York is paying approximately  6 500. monthly on behalf of S.O.E. London and 3 300. monthly on behalf of S.O.E. Far East.  It is anticipated that the West African missions will also ask S.O.E. New York to supply them with material of various kinds for which similar commitments will be made.  2. Registry. During the past nine months G. headquarters has built up a considerable volume of records. At present the registry contains over 2 100 files and a card index of 16 000 names of individuals and  subjects., Disposition of 3 0. Dollar Expended -month April 21 to May 20 1942  0.0.1 0.0.2 0.0.3  G.P. G.l  Communications Administration  S.O. London and Singapore G.T.  27 300 27 8.800 9 3.800 4 5 200 5 4 100 4 21.500 21 8 600 9 700 8f 9i 12.500 12  101 500 100, PART IV PASSP 0RT CONTROL G. 0.  P., CONTENTS  Page  History  1. 1939-1941.... 1 2. 1942........... 2 Appendices, 1. HISTORY 1. 1939-19Al. Except in the case of travellers to the United Kingdom and India visa issuing posts in the United States prior to the entry of that country into the war were left much to their own devices in the matter of granting visas and interpreting the instructions' issued periodically by the Passport Control Department in London. The visas granted by visa issuing posts including the Passport Control Office in New York were recorded in the fom of visa cards see Appendix l . These cards which dated from pre-war days contained a minimum amount of useful information and constituted the central visa record of the Passport Control Office. A common visa application fom see Appendix 2  was in use in all visa issuing posts in the United States including the Passport Control Office. Copies of these forms were received from visa issuing posts only in cases where they related to travellers proceeding to the United Kingdom or whose cases needed prior reference before the visa was granted. In any case these forms failed to provide the information necessary for the Passport. Control Office purposes.  The Passport Control Office staff consisted of a Passport Control Officer an Assistant Passport Control Officer a Senior Examiner three interviewers a receptionist and a female secretary. The Passport Control Office account at the bank was held in the names of the first two officers., 2. 19Zi2 The entry of the United States into the war in December 1941 afforded an opportrinity for a revision of the Passport Control organisation to be affected. The first step was the coordination of the work of visa issuing.posts in the United States with the work of the Passport Control Office and the various British control posts in close proximity to the American mainland. The primary object was to bring visa issuing posts under the complete control of the Passpo-rt Control Office both in the matter of granting visas and in regard to supplying comprehensive particulars regarding intending travellers to or through British possessions  The visa card used for visa reporting purposes had proved quite inadequate as also had the visa application form which in any case was made available to the Passport Control Office only in the cases already stated. The first practical step was taken in January 1942 toward re-organization of the Passport Control Office when a memorandum of instructions was circulated to visa issuing posts in the United States and copies forwarded for infomation to the British Control points at Bermuda Jamaica and Trinidad and the Director of Passport Control in London. Supplies of a new visa application form were distributed to visa issuing posts and the photograph requirement for visa applicants was introduced. A copy of the memorandum referred to forms Appendix 3  While the number of normal travellers decreased to insignificant proportions following American entry into the war the number of persons proceeding to various points of the British Empire to work directly or indirectly in the war effort considerably increased. The circular instructions of January referred to above were therefore modified by subsequent instructions circulated to visa issuing posts and copied to British Control points on May 6 1942. This circular a copy of which forms Appendix 4 had regard solely to a base workers b persons proceeding abroad on behalf of the American war effort. As a final step in the introduction of a coordinated visa system special arrangements were made to deal with the increasing number of persons travelling in an official or semi-official capacity. Special instructions regarding this category of traveller were circulated to visa issuing posts and copied to British Control points on May 22. A copy of the memorandum forms, Appendix 5-The three memoranda referred to above embrace the details of the coordinating visa system affecting the U.S.A.  The working of this system has considerably increased the work of the Passport Control Office which now is responsible for all British visas granted in the United States except in the few cases of United States citizens travelling in direct transit through British control points. A regular interchange of visa application forms plus additional information regarding travellers passes between visa issuing posts the Passport Control Office and the British control points.  It became necessary to change the internal organisation of the Passport Control Office to meet the demands of the new system and a circular instruction a copy of which forms Appendix 6 was recently circulated to individual members of the Passport Control Office staff. This circular explains in detail the daily activities of the Passport Control Office and illustrates how the general visa system explained in the three memoranda referred to above actually works.  British visas granted in the United States average approximately 3 000 a month and practically all are granted to United States citizens over 80 of whom are going abroad to engage in work directly or indirectly connected with the war effort., APPENDICES  1. Temporary Visitors Card 2. Special Visa Application Form 3. Memorandum of Instructions to British Visa Issuing Posts in the U.S.A. 28.1.42 4. Modification of Above Instructions with regard to U.S. Citizens Proceeding to U.S. Bases in British territory 6.5.42 5. Instructions Regarding Official or Semi-official Travellers 22.5.42 6. Staff Circular Regarding Internal Organisation of Passport Control Office 5.5.42, TEMPORARY VISITOR S CARD.  m Family name first. Nationality No. of Passport Permanent address รขโยฌ รขโยฌ 'ate of sailing if known and ship easons for journey and length of visit Names of other persons included on Passport and date of birth of any children included Name of First Port of landing in Great Britain or Ireland Names of British Countries Dominions Colonies or Mandated Territories you desire to visit.... Do you hold a ReturnTicket ...  Btify that the object of my journey is a Temporary Visit only and that it i ffot my intention to take up either permanent residence or employment in British Territory.   Signature of passport holder. Date No. Consulate.. READ CAREFULLY.  1 This form is intended for use only by applicants for visas who are desirous or paying a temporary visit to British Territory. IT SHOULD NOT BE USED BY THOSE WHO INTEND TO TAKE UP PERMANENT RESIDENCE OR ANY FORM OF EMPLOY MENT EITHER PAID OR UNPAID IN BRITISH TERRITORY.  2 If the first port of landing in British Territory is in the Irish Free State travellers must obtain a visa from an Irish Free State Consulate. Such visa will be good for a sub sequent visit to Great Britain or Northern Ireland  3 Conversely travellers obtaining a visa for Great Britain and Northern Ireland may subsequently use this visa for a visit to the Irish Free State provided that they have first made a landing in Great Britain.  4 If an Irish Free State visa is obtained for a visit to the Irish Free State and Great Britain and Northern Ireland an additional visa is required in order to visit certain other parts of the British Empire.  8153 Wt.P.1425 100m 14 8/38 Gp.697 C&SLtd., , APPENDIX  SPECIAL VISA APPLICATION 7051  1. Uame in full Family name first in CAPITALS 2 Permanentaddress  3. Address in New York City or point at which visa is requested 4. Names of other persons on passport in case of children give date of birth andbirthplace 5. Nationality Number ofPassport Date ofissue Place ofisstie Is it valid for return to your country of residence Passport is validuntil  6. Country and date ofbirth If naturalized give date of naturalization 7. Occupation 8. Purpose ofvisit 9. Destination 10. Route to befollowed 11. If visit is for business state kind of business and gives names and address of business firms you willvisit 12 If visit is not for business state names and addresses of persons whom you proposevisiting  Port of  13. DepartureDate Ship Embarkation 14. State British territories for which visa is desired and length of time in each Britishcountry 15. If in transit give particulars 16. Bankreference 17. Business references in U.S.A. DATE SIGNATURE, APPENDIX  28th January 1942.  MEMORANDUM  The entrance of the United States into the war has facilitated our efforts to detect and restrict the movements of travellers engaged in activities inimical to the United Nations. Our efforts in the above regard may now be made more effective by closer collaboration with the United States Authorities whose out look is now identical with our own and by co-ordinating our visa system Yfith the activities of the Immigration and Censorship Serv ices in British territory particularly the British control points at Bermuda and Trinidad.  The above considerations have prompted the formulation of new visa regulations a copy of which is enclosed herein to gether with a supply of the new visa application forms the use of which will replace the present card system as the medium for visa reporting.  Under the new regulations outgoing travellers from the United States are divided into throe principal groups as follows   a United States Citizensj b Nationals of Enemy Occupied Countries c Other Nationals. The new visa application form will be the co-ordinating medium in the refining process beginning with interrogation of the applicant at the visa issuing post passing to the checking of the duplicate application form against the centra.1 record of the Pass port Control Office and continuing with the interrogation of the traveller at the British control point.  The control points will be furnished by the Passport Control Office with copies of visa applications submitted by travel lers intending to pass through or visit their respective territorie It is particularly important that applicants in completing the visa application forms should be explicit and precise., It will bo observed that except for United States citizens proceeding under contract to bases in British territory and United States citizens in transit through British territory all applicants for visas transit or otherwise should now bo referred for decision  to this office. The new instructions do not supersede standing instruc  tions regarding   1 Diplomatic visas which will continue to be granted by His Majesty's Embassy  2 Official courtesy visas which will continue to be granted without reference to this office  3 The waiving of the visa requirement in accord ance with local arrangements such as exit in the Bahamas and Barbados will continue to be effective  4 The need for reference to this office of all visa applications submitted by U.S. Citizens born in enemy territory. Visa issuing posts should not hesitate to refer to this office in any cases where a doubt arises whether with regard to the applicant or the procedure to be followed., PROCEDURE FOR GRANTING BRITISH VISAS IN THE UNITED STATES  A UNITED STATES CITIZEUS  NOTE United States passports are now granted only after the American Authorities have satisfied themselves regarding the travellers' bona Tides and the necessity for his or her journey. United States passports are now restricted in validity to a period of six months and are valid only for the particular territory to be visited during the course of the journey for which the passport has been issued.  Category 1 UNITED STATES CITIZENS PROCEEDING TO UNITED STATES BASES IN BRITISH TERRITORY. All such travellers arc now raadc the subject of a thorough investigation by the American Authorities before being granted passports. Such persons may therefore be granted British visas without being required to complete the visa application form provided of course that their passports contain the State Depart ment's validation for the base to which they are proceeding and that they are in the possession of a contractor's letter stating that they are being engaged for defence work. On arrival at the bases such travellers are subject to American supervision dis cipline and control. Visa issuing posts should continue to use the card system for reporting visas granted to travellers of this category. United States citizens wishing to join relatives engaged on defence projects in British territory are now generally refused passports by United States Authorities. Such applicants present ing United States passports containing a base validation granted prior to December 7th should be referred back to the State Depart ment for a revalidation which normally will not be granted. In special cases where a validation is granted after December 7jsh the applicant will be subject to the procedure sot forth under Category 3 below.  Catogory 2 UNITED STATES CITIZENS IN TRANSIT THROUGH BRITISH TERRITORY  Allsuch travellers should complete the visa application form in duplicate and furnish three photographs. The transit visa may then be granted. The duplicate visa application form together, -2   with two photographs and any additional information which tho visa issuing post may consider useful should bo forwarded by air mail to the Passport Control Office. Subsequently a copy of the visa application form will be sent by this office to the British control point through which the traveller intends to pass. Category 5 UNITED STATES CITIZENS PROCEEDING TO DEGTIHATIOH IN  BRITISH TERRITORY.  Such travellers should complete the application form in duplicate and furnish three photographs. The duplicate form together with two photographs and any additional information which the visa issuing .office consider useful should be forwarded to this office for checking against Passport Control records and where considered necessary for further investiga/tion. Visas should not be granted until an authorization has boon received from this office. Subsequently a copy of the visa application form will be sent by the Passport Control Office to the authorities in the British territory which tho ti-avcller intends to visit.  Applicants who take exception to tho delay involved arc free to apply in person at this office where however they will be sub ject to the same checking process as would normally be applied if their application had been transmitted through a consular post.  B NATIONALS OF ENEMY OCCUPIED COUNTRIES  NOTE Aliens leaving the United States arc required to be in posses sion of an Exit or Re-entry permit. These permits are granted only after the aliens have satisfied tho American Authorities regarding their bona fides and the necessity for the journey. Applicants for British visas under this category shoilld before being permitted to complete the visa application form produce a card from the United Statos Immigration Authorities formally stating that an Exit permit will be issued at the time of embarkation.  To ensure that travelling facilities shall be granted only to those nationals whose sympathies lie with the United Nations it has been decided that all applicants under this category whither applying for transit or ordinary visa shall before being permitted, to complete a visa application form provide a letter of re commendation from their consular representative appointed by their government in exile or in the absence of such repres entatives from thoir recognised national organization in the  U.S.A. Such applicants should then complete the visa application form in duplicate and furnish three photographs. The duplicate application form together with two photographs should then be for warded to this office together with any other information which may bo considered useful. Visas should not be granted until an auth orization has boon received from this office. Subsequently copies of the visa application form will be made and forwarded by the Pass port Control Office to the authorities in the British territory which the traveller intends to transit or visit. C OTHER NATIONALS  NOTE Aliens lca.ving the United States are required to bo in poss ession of an Exit or Re-ontry permit. These permits are granted only after the aliens have satisfied the American Authorities regarding their bona fides and the necessity for the Journey. Applicants for British visas under this cate gory should before being permitted to complete the visa application form produce a card from the United States Imm igration Authorities formally stating that an Exit permit will be issued at the time of embarkation  Such applicants should furnish two letters of recommen dation from reputable local sources after which they should complete the visa application form in duplicate and furnish three photographs. The duplicate visa application form together with two photographs should Mien be forwarded to this office for checking against P.C.O. records and where considered necessary for further investigation. Visas should not bo granted until an authorization has boon received from this office. Subsequently a copy of the visa application form will be forwarded by the Passport Control Office to the British control point through which the traveller is intending to pass or the British territory to bo visited., BRITISH VISA APPLICATION FORM  Applicants are advised that FAILURE TO FURNISH PRECISE INFORMATION in answering the following questions may involve delay in the grant of the visa.  Personal particulars   a Name PRINT IN FULL .  b Address Home .  c Local address .  d Place ofbirth. e Date ofbirth.  f Nationality. g Nationality atbirth.  h If you have ever changed your nationality state how when and where the change waseffected.  i Nationality offather. j Nationality ofmother.  k Are you married orsingle. Family particulars Wife or Husband .   a Full name of Wife or Husband in case of wife  b Place ofbirth. c Date of  d Nationality. e Nationality prior to marriage Children. Name. Place of Birth. Date of birth.  Occupational particulars   a Occupation .  b Name of firm if travelling on behalf of firm attach sponsoring letter from same .  c Address of firm.  d Nature of firm's business.  e Period during which you have been with firm. References   a State particulars of two 2 responsible residents in the U.S.A. to whom you are well known. Name. Address. Occupation.   b State particulars of two 2 references in the British territory you intend to visit.  Name. Address. Occupation. Nationality.   Not applicable to travellers in transit through British territory.  Over, 5. Passport particulars  a Number. b Date of  d Date of expiry.  e Are particulars of wife and/or family included therein. 6. Visa particulars  a British territory for which you require visa specify accurately  b Duration of visit. 7. Travel particulars  a Final destination.  b Address at final destination  c Purpose of visit issue. c   PRECISE INFORMATION SHOULD BE   d Name of vessel in which you intend to travel.  e Port and date ofembarkation.  f Port ofdebarkation.  g Route you intend to follow from e to final destination  h Do you intend to remain permanently at final destination anticipated period ofvisit. 8. Previous visits to British territory - Have you visited British territory since August 1939 if so state where when and for what purpose if visit was in transit state also final destination . Signature  Date .  Notes  1. Please complete this form in duplicate. 2. Please furnish two photographs which should be identical presenting full face vision and of normal passport photograph size. 3. Any changes affecting status travelling arrangements or other matter with which this form is concerned occuring after the British visa has been granted should be communicated to this office in order to obviate the possibility of difficulties on arrival in British territory., APPENDIX L  New York City  T/575 6th May 1942  Dear Consulate General Consulate Vice-Consulate.  We enclose herein a memorandum setting forth the procedure to be adopted in dealing with applications for visas made by United States citizens proceeding to the bases named in the Anglo-American Bse Agreement. We should perhaps explain that a considerable increase in this category of traveller has taken place in recent months with a corresponding increase in the percentage of those who were bom in enemy territory or of enemy parentage.  It has therefore become desirable that this office should be placed in possession of fuller informat ion respecting these travellers than that at present furnished in the form of the visa card. The new procedure is a step to ward the elimination of the visa card the use of which will now be restricted to travellers entitled to receive official visas.  Yours ever.  PASSPORT CONTROL OFFICE, T/572. BRITISH PASSPORT CONTROL OFFICE  NM YORK.  5th May 1942.  MEMORANDUM.  With reference to the visa regulations circulated in P.C.O. Memorandum dated January 28 1942 it has now become desirable to modify the requirements in respect of travellers in Category A l  i.e. U. S. citizens proceeding to U. S. bases in British territory .  1. Travellers to bases are divided into two categories as followss a Utader the provisions of Section l . Article 13 the Anglo- American Ise Agreement members of the United States Forces proceeding to the Leased Area or any person employed by or under contract with the United States Government in connection with the construction maintenance operation or defence of the Sses are not subject to the Immigration Regulations obtaining in the various territories in which Bases are located. Such persons are granted cards of identity issued by the United States War or Naval Department. Holders of these identity cards are not subject to investigation by us nor are they required to possess British visas. Nothing that follows refers to this class of traveller to Bases nor will the present arrangement regarding than be in any way modified.  b Persons proceeding to Bases who are recruited by contractors are not granted identity cards by United States authorities who insist on them being in possession of valid United States passports. Such persons are subject to the British visa requirements. 2. It has become necessary both for our own purposes and for the benefit of the United States authorities that we should be in possession of more precise information regarding travellers in this particular category than that at present furnished in the visa cards. Consequently a visa application form for use in the case of Base workers has been designed and a supply is forwarded herein. 3. Base workers should complete the visa application form in duplicate. It may be found convenient to arrange for this formality to be completed by the contractor whose office representative will also be required to countersign the fom. The visa may be granted after the visa application form has been completed and without prior reference to this office. Subsequent ly one copy of the fom should be forwarded to this office in the same way as the white forms relating to other categories of traveller are now passed ... This arrangement will supersede the present card system of reporting visas granted to Base workers. The forms so transmitted will be checked against the records of this office and will be made available to the United States authorities who not infrequently apply to us for information. No photographs are required and notes 1 and 2 at the end of the V.A.F. may be ignored.  4-The Bases referred to above are those enumerated in the Anglo- American Base Agreement i.e. Bermuda Trinidad Jamaica Antigua St. Lucia Exuma Island British Guiana and Newfoundland .  5. Visa applicants employed in work connected with the war effort such as employees of American aircraft and construction companies etc. and who are proceeding to parts of the British Bnpire other than those specified in the Anglo-American Base Agreement should not be considered as Base workers. Such applicants are subject to the visa regulations applicable to travellers in Category A3 see P.C.O. Memorandum dated January 28 1942 and as such should complete white visa application forms., 6. It is realized that in dealing with such cases it will frequently be necessary to obviate the delay occasioned by reference of the visa application forms to this office. In such instances visa issuing posts should use their discretion in granting visas without prior reference. Where this course is adopted however an indication to this effect should be made in the copies of the visa application form forwarded to the Passport Control Office in New York. Should subsequent checking at this office bring to light adverse information regarding a traveller granted a visa under the discretionary powers given above the case will be taken up by the Passport Control Office direct with the British authorities in the territory concerned. 7. The use of the visa card as a means of reporting visas granted will from now on be restricted to travellers entitled to receive Diplomatic or Official courtesy visas A new procedure relating to this category of traveller will however shortly be introduced and an explanatory Memorandum will be circulated soon.  Signed R. S. Heaney.  Asst. Passport Control Officer., Form D No  BRITISH. VISA APPLICATION FORM for United States citizens engaged on war projects.  Applicants are advised that FAILURE TO FURNISH PRECISE INFORMATION in answering the following questions may involve delay in the grant of the visa required.  1. Personal Particulars  a Name PRINT IN FULL  b Home address.  c Place of birth Country . Town .  d Date ofbirth.....  e Nationality at birth. If a naturalized citizen state date.and place.ofnaturalization.   f Nationality offather. h Nationality ofmother.    g Ifmarried statenationalityofwifeprevious tomarriage.    i 2. Occupational Particulars  a Occupation.  b Name of firm.  c Address offirm.  d Occupation prior to present employment  e Previous employer... References   a State particulars of two 2 responsible residents in the U. S. A. to whom you are well known. Name. Address. Occupation.  4. Passport Particulars  a Number. b Date of issue  c P d lace of issue 5. Travel Particulars  a Destination.  b Territory for which British visa is required  c Port and date ofdeparture./, 6. Previous Visits to British Territory If you have visited British territory since August 1939 state where when and for what purpose. If visit was in transit state also final destination.  Signature of applicant  Company Countersignature.  Date.1942.  i NOTES 1. Please complete this form in duplicate. 2. Please furnish two 2 identical photographs presenting full face vision of normal passport photograph size. 3. Any changes affecting status travelling arrangements or other matter with which this form is concerned occurring after the British visa has been granted should be communicated to this office in order to obviate the possibility of difficulties on arrival in British territory., APPENDIX 5.  T/579  BRITISH PASSPORT CONTROL OFFICE  New York  22nd May 1942.  With reference to paragraph 7 of the Memorandum  T/572 enclosed in P.C.O. circular T/575 of May 6 1942 it has become desirable for this office to be provided with more precise infomation regarding persons to whom Diplomatic or Official Courtesy visas are granted. For this purpose we enclose herein a supply of Foms F which should be completed in respect of all travellers in the above category.  The form has been designed to provide the minimum information necessary for P.C.O. purposes consequently it is important that in completing it applicants should be explicit.  Photographs will not be required in the case of official travellers although it would be helpful if visa issuing posts when transmitting completed forms to this office would include any additional infomation in their possession regarding the traveller particularly in the case of couriers.  The grant of a Diplomatic or Official Courtesy visa should not of course be made dependent upon completion of Form F which is intended for infomation and record purposes only. Copies of completed foms should however be forwarded to this office as soon as possible after the grant of the visa.  The use of a visa application fom for official travellers constitutes the final step in the introduction of the co-ordinated visa system envisaged in P.C.O. circular dated January 28 1942. The visa card which is no longer suitable for  P.C.O. purposes has now been eliminated as the medium for visa reporting. PASSPORT CONTROL OFFICE.   To visa issuing posts only.  CIRCULATED TO ALL CONSULAR POSTS, Form F  No.  Official Visa  BRITISH VISA INFORMATION FORM  1. Personal particulars  a Name in full .  b Nationality .  c Local address .  d Place and date of birth  e Married or single . 2. Particulars of wife if included in husband's passport  a Full name before marriage.  b Place and date of birth.  c Nationality prior to marriage. 3. Official particulars  a Government by whichaccredited.  b Officialstatus..  c If Consular Officer where stationed .  d If not career officer state normal profession 4. Passport particulars  a Official or regular passport .  b Number.  c Date and place of issue.  d Date of expiration. 5. Visa particulars  a British teritory for which visa is required .  b Duration of visit. 6. Travel particulars  a Ultimate destination.  b Probable date of departure from U. S. A. ..  c Means of transportation aj-rlJ-n .. steamship   d Intended route to final destination. Signature of Applicant  Diplomatic Official Courtesy S Visa grantedon. Gratis  Signature of Visa Issuing Official, APPMDIX 6  5th May 1942.  The procedure set forth in the attached memorandum must be rigidly adhered to by all members of the Passport Control Office staff who should keep the memorandum in their respective Directive files., Memorandum. The Passport Control Office is the only department of the British Government with which the majority of aliens normally have to deal consequently they tend to assess the general standard of British bureaucracy as a whole by their impressions gained in contact with us. We should therefore seek to reflect efficiency combined with politeness. 2. To be efficient is to be well versed in the instructions and regulations governing our activities and to be consistent in the information which we impart to applicants. To ensure this each interviewer will be provided with a folder marked Directives . Specific and general instructions will be circulated as occasion requires and they should be kept by interviewers in chronological order in their directive folder. An instruction which has been superseded by a subsequent ruling should be cancelled by a diagonal line across the page and noted as follows - Cancelled -see subsequent instruction dated...... 3. Politeness in a Passport Control Office is indivisable. We share collectively in the credit or discredit resulting from the behaviour of any particular member of the staff. Precision and brevity need involve no sacrifice of gentility. Other considerations such as personal appearance manner of address and deportment are of course involved in this matter of politeness. Officers are advised to read and mark paragraph 71 of the Passport Control Manual. 4. All correspondence sent out of the Passport Control Office will be signed by me, Passport Control Office Organisation.  Receptionist -McFarlane.  1. With the introduction of the counter system for dealing with visitors the functions of the receptionist will be somewhat changed. His first concern will be to see that visa applicants are provided with the appropriate foms pen ink and blotting paper. He should not attempt to answer enquiries relating to travel regulat ions conditions etc. -these must be all left to the interviewers. In an unobtrusive manner he will arrange that applicants are dealt with according to the order of their arrival. He will be the medium for the passing of passports visa application forms etc. between the interviewers and the senior examiner. He will see that no applicant is kept waiting if an interviewer see below is available. He will keep a watchful eye for officials and business representatives whose .purpose is to interview me. In such cases he should inform me of the name of the caller and the organisation he represents before admitting him to my room. He will keep the public counter neat and orderly. He will see that ink wells are clean and regularly refilled and that blotting paper for the public use is renewed daily. The receptionist should come to my room in response to the buzzer. In the case of applicants admitted beyond the counter he should provide chairs. Generally speaking the receptionist will be the first contact made by the applicant with the Passport Control Office and -first impressions go a long way.  Interviewers -Mr. Robertson. Mr. Brown. Mr. James  2. The introduction of the counter system will also affect the interviewers. Passports and visa application forms should be checked and the applicant interrogated at the counter. Under no circumstances may visa chops seals or office files or documents be taken to or placed on the counter. 3. The general practice will be for visas to be granted on the day following that on which the application is made. During the initial interview the officer concerned will satisfy himself that all the necessary information has been obtained that the passport is valid, 2  and that the particulars contained in the passport conform with those quoted in the visa application form. He will then return the passport to the applicant who should be requested to call the following day. The interviewer s initials should be placed at the top centre of the visa application fom and duplicate. The applicant's photographs  should be affixed to the forms which are then to be placed in the tray marked FORMS on the senior examiner's table.  4. The Forms tray will be cleared periodically throughout the day by Miss Tribes. She will check the names of applicants together with their references against the P.C.O. and Security Co-ordination indexes and return them to me initialled in red checked . In cases where the indexes reveal prior adverse information the relevant file should be attached. I shall inspect each case and where the visa is to be granted affix my initials in green visa authorised . Cases to be deferred will be marked accordingly with an intimation as to when the applicant should call again. Cases in which the visa is to be refused will be so marked. The forms will be returned to the interviewer whose initials they contain. Each interviewer should have on his desk a tray marked VISAS where the forms should be retained pending the return of applicants. 5. On the return of the applicant the interviewer will ask for the passport and then extract from the VISAS tray the relevant forms. If the case'is marked Refuse the interviewer should endeavour to make the unpleasant pill as palatable as possible although the reason for the refusal must not be quoted -except in cases where it results from the application of a general ruling. The applicant may be advised to address a letter to me on the matter if it appears that this advice may turn away wrath. In most cases the visa will be authorised and having obtained the passport the interviewer should affix the appropriate visa chop and hand the passport together with the visa application forms to the senior examiner. 6. The senior examiner will check the visa and passport against the visa application forms on which the visa number should be stamped both at the top right hand comer and on the appended fee voucher., 3 After receiving the stipulated fee the voucher should be completed  and detached and placed in a cover. The fee stamps should then be  affixed to the visa which the senior examiner will sign and then have the passport returned to the owner. The senior examiner will initial the visa application form which then should be placed in the tray marked FILE . This tray will be emptied periodically by Miss Trites.  7. In dealing with applicants who give valid reasons for the visa to be granted without the normal 24 hours delayj interviewers should personally take the forms to Miss Trites who should complete the formalities set forth in paragraph 4 above. The procedure will then continue as set forth in the immediately preceding paragraph.  Certain additional duties will be assigned to each interviewer as follows Mr. .Robertson   a All applicants regarding whom it is necessary to make a reference telegraphic or otherwise should be referred to Mr. Robertson who will first have the visa application fonns passed through the checking process outlined in paragraph 4. He will make a brief summary of the case and draft an appropriate telegram or despatch. Summary and draft should be passed to me before the latter is typed for despatch. Deposits in respect of telegraphic references should be made to Mr. Lewis see under heading 'Personal Assistant' below . Mr. Robertson will keep a referred cases book. The pages of the book which should be foolscap size and indexed throughout should be divided into five columns headed as follows  1. Date of Reference 2. Name of applicant 3. Territory concerned 4. Authorization particulars 5. Date visa granted. Entries in columns 1 2 and 3 should be made on the day that reference is actually made. Columns 4 and 5 must be completed on the respective dates that the authorisation is received and the visa is granted. All refusals are to be underlined in RED ink including local, refusals which should contain a reference to the correspondence on which the refusal is based. All correspondence regarding referred cases must be filed with the visa application form the completion of which must always constitute the first step before the application or the reference of the application is considered. Mr. Brown   b The maintenance of the various suspect lists and the P.C.O. index will be under Mr. Brown's charge. All circulars etc. relating to suspects will be passed automatically to him and he will be responsible for seeing that the various lists together with the P.C.O. card index are kept up to date. In this regard a thorough overhaul of the card index is desirable see paragraphs 56 to 6l inclusive in the Passport Control Manual . Mr. Jamesg c The stationery store including the stocks of visa forms will be under the care of Mr. James. All requests for supplies received from consular posts will be passed to Mr. James for action. There is much printed stationery which is now useless as a result of our changed location. This should be segregated and catalogued after which I will decide how it is to be disposed of. A large volume of cards is I believe stored in a warehouse. The nature and volume of this material together with particulars of storage cost if any should be ascertained in order that we may consider the best and most economical method of storage. An inventory of existing P.C.O. stationery stores should be made and periodically amended to indicate depletions and acquisitions. Stationery reserves should be carefully and neatly stacked to obviate wastage by damaging. Senior ffyanriner -Mr. Wilson  9. Mr. Wilson will preside in the public office for the efficient and smooth running of which he will be responsible. All doubtful and difficult cases should be referred to him in the first instance and he will consult me whenever necessary. 10. He will be provided each morning with a stock of Consular Fee, 5  stamps for the day's work. The stock will be taken from the P.C.O. stamp reserve kept in the safe yet to be rescued from Security Co-ordination . In return he will give a signed receipt in which the number of fee stamps of each denomination will be specified. At the end of public business each day the balance of Consular Fee stamps together with the cash collected and the fee vouchers will be handed to the personal assistant see below who in return will hand the Senior Examiner a signed receipt in which the number of fee stamps returned will be tabulated according to denomination.  With regard to the functions of the Senior Examiner in the matter of granting visas please see paragraph 6 above . Personal Assistant -Mr. Lewis  11. The maintenance of all P.C.O. financial records will be Mr. Lewis's responsibility. The reserve of Consular Fee stamps will be kept in the P.C.O. safe when available but will be in the charge of the Personal Assistant and he will prepare all indents to the Consulate- General for stamps....These indents are to be in duplicate and signed by me. One copy of the indent is to be retained in a special folder marked Indents and Receipts in the safe. 12. He will receive deposits in respect of telegraphic references for which he will issue a formal receipt to applicants. Residue of deposits will be kept in the safe and subsequently returned to applicants who in exchange should sign their names on a fomal receipt. He will prepare for my signature all cheques in respect of  P.C.O. disbursements including salaries. He will despatch all outgoing P.C.O. mail which should be placed in a mailing tray on his desk -each envelope should clearly indicate Airmail Register or Special Delivery .   SAFE HAND mail is to be sent through Security's mailing department. Messages by hand should be given to McFarlane . 13 Mr. Lewis will be responsible for the arrangement referred to in paragraph 10 above whereby a daily supply of fee stamps is furnished to the Senior Examiner. He will keep the daily receipts signed by the Senior Examiner to whom he will similarly give a receipt in respect, 6 of the residue of stamps returned each evening. At the conclusion of public business each day he will receive the cash and the fee vouchers from the Senior Examiner. After checking the stamps the cash and the vouchers the two former will be placed in the safe for the night and the vouchers in numerical order visa numbers will be retained by Mr. Lewis. 14. All entries in the financial registers including the Fee Cash Book will be made on the day on which the services were granted  in this respect see paragraph 17 to 50 inclusive in the Passport Control Manual . Each morning the financial registers should be brought to me for signature after which the cash taken the previous day will be passed to the bank by Mr. Lewis personally. 15. The compilation and typing of all P.C.O. primary correspondence such as Returns to the Foreign Office and Consulate General will be attended to by Mr. Lewis as also will the typing of all circular instructions to consular posts and Reports to the Director of Passport Control Ifepartment London. He will however not be concerned in the incidental correspondence arising out of visa applications which will be attended to by the P.C.O. Secretariat see under this heading below . Secretariat Section 8 -Mr. Stead. Miss Trites. Mjss Hall. 16. Section 8 will be accommodated in a separate office for the reason that files will be used which it is undesirable to expose to the public gaze. The work of this sub-section will be found to be indivisable and as such it will fall under Mr. Stead's direction he working under my guidance.  a Miss Hall will continue as secretary-typist to Section 8.  b Miss Trites will be in charge of the visa reporting system as set forth in P.C.O. memorandum dated January 28 1942 and subsequent circulars. At regular periods throughout the day she will clear the FORMS and FILE trays on the Senior Examiner's desk. She. will pass visa application forms through the process set forth in paragraph 4 above. She, will be responsible for the transmission of copies of visa application  forms together with any additional information gleaned from our records to British Control points. The actual mailing will be done by Mr. Lewis . She will maintain the visa index composed of filed copies of visa application forms completed at the P.C.O. or received from consular posts. All correspondence relating to a particular visa application must be  attached to and filed with the application form.  Miss Trites will deal with all formal consular requests for authority to grant visas and it is essential that these should be dealt with expeditiously.  Correspondence of a general nature particularly that referring to general instructions must not be attached to visa application forms but must be kept in the central P.C.O. records together with all corres pondence other than that relating to a specific visa application.   c Mr. Stead will take charge of all Passport Control Office records  much in need of attention which should be kept on the lines adopted in the Summary of Visa Regulations that is on a territorial basis. Each territory will form a separate file in which the relevant correspondence will be kept in chronological order with the exception that replies must be attached to the letters to which they refer . 17. He will be responsible for all correspondence on the subject of Suspicious Travellers and in this connection will continue to pass memoranda to Section A.l. D.T. and maintain contact with the State Department's Office in New York and other United States organisations who apply to us for information regarding travellers. He will maintain a Shipping Register and keep in close contact with Pan American Airlines and American Export Line with a view to keeping au courant airline activities.  No correspondence other than memoranda to Section A.l and formal replies to Consulates on visa applications may be transmitted without my approval.   Signed R. S. Heaney PASSPORT CONTROL OFFICER., s.o.e. Hi t v/ FILE NUMBER SUBJECT SOE HISTORY 41 DIRECTORATE OF SECURITY CO-ORDINATION IN AMERICA VOLUME FROM 194 3 TO, 4'  report  BRITISH SECURITY CO-ORDINATION  IN  THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA  i March 17 1943  i, THE ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARMENT UNDER SECTION 3i4 OF THE PUBLIC RECbRDS ACT 1958., MM &1P0KT  oa BRITISH 51CUE1TX CO-OEDIHATIOK  IH  THEUNITEDSTATESOP ALRtICA  PART U  SECUEITX, CGMTEMfS  Page  I History  1. Ponration nd urowth..... 1 2. Gmsal r SecurityOrganization. . .2 3. U.S. Juiaism....... 4. L ter D v lopr.ent ... .... 5 II. Functions and Organization 1. Section A.i. U.S. snd Canadian Liaison.... 8 2. Section 6.1. Consular security Organization inQ.S.A.9 3. Section B.2. Consular security Organization in South America......... 11 4. Section B.3. Industrial Security Organisation in South Arserica. 5. Section C. Staff andAccounts . 6. Section fi.l. L&bour and Cc mmias....... 7. Section D.2. Eeporting ..... 8. Section D.T.A.l. Lock Fire Inspection... 9. Section L.T.a.2. Factory Security....... 10. Section D.T.A.4. Credit Investigation... 11. Section D.T.A.5. Personnel Investigation for Allied Arr.ind Forces .. .. 12. WashingtonOffice......... III. Security Service Scpresentation X. Bermuda Seat Indiee British Guiana -anwWmSSeawi ssdi.32 2. Canada and K wf untuand ................... 37 3. Co-Ordination o Security Measures and Inteliig nee...................... 41 IV Prevention of Contraband Traffic in South As .erica............. 45, I. HISTORY Formation and Growth.  The development of a separate Security Division in the original Passport Control organization in Mew York was dictated by the presence in the United States of the British Purchasing Commission and other British Missions interested in supplies of vital war material. The British Purchasing Commission originally possessed a Security Officer in the person of Mr. Handsh Mitchell who by the time Mr. W. S. Stephenson arrived in the summer of 1940 as P.C.O. had already effected some useful measures in respect of the internal security of the Commission and also in respect of the numerous American factories which were then engaged in filling British orders.  At the beginning of December 1940 Mr. Mitchell was transferred to Bermuda as M.I.6 representative and his place in the Purchasing Commission was taken by Mr. I. Fraser working directly under the orders of P.C.O. This arrangement was made possible through the co-operation of the late Arthur Purvis Director-General of the Commission who provided Mr. Fraser and his staff with space in the Commission's premises at 15 Broad Street New York. This arrangement was designed to promote the undertaking which now fell to Mr. Stephenson of co-ordinating such measures of security as were necessary to protect British interests and property in the United States including shipping in American ports. On January 30 1941 Lord Halifax who had just arrived in Washington as H.M. Ambassador formally advised H.M. Consulates and other British Missions that Mr. Stephenson would in future be known as Director of Security Co ordination in the United States at the same time the State Department was officially informed of the appointment which was accepted.  The following sections each headed by a competent officer recruited locally were accordingly inaugurated Internal Security Port Security Factory Security Investigation of Recruits for R.A.F. Civilian Technical Corps Doctors etc. Credit Investigation of factories and Individuals seeking British contracts.  By the spring1 of 1941 some measure of success was being  achieved in co-ordinating the various security problems. On a perfectly, 2 open basis contacts had been secured with various U. S. government agencies such as the Office of Naval Intelligence Military Intelligence G.2 Coast Guard the New York Police Force Bomb and Arson squad Alien investigation the U. Immigration Department the Treasury Department etc. In nearly all instances the first approach had been made by the  U. S. departments themselves. In addition having the backing of the British Purchasing Commission it was possible for the Security Division to tap sources of information and make contacts with a large number of productive individuals and concerns such as banks credit bureaus engineering firms international corporations in almost every field of production and to secure from them either conscious or unconscious co-operation. Because the ever increasing activities of the Security Division were ostensibly for the protection of British contracts and commitments the possibility of accusations that British Secret Intelligence operations were becoming increasingly active in the U. S. was greatly minimized. 2. Consular Security Organization. During January 1941 in view of the unsatisfactory conditions of Port Security in New York City it became advisable to organize a nationwide Port Security system which would cover all orts where British or Allied vessels called. In conjunction with the Bnbassy D.N.I. Ottawa and various authorities in London sanction was secured to build such an organization to become a section of the Security Division. During February the first appointments of Consular Security Officers were made and by March the field organization was virtually complete. In almost every instance it was possible to secure a British subject who had long been resident in the port in which he was to serve and who had had in the past considerable commercial shipping experience.  By June 1941 the Consular Security Organization in the U.S.A. had proved its value. Numerous problems of ships' crew mostly among Allied and Chinese crews inspired by enemy activities had been settled or thwarted by prompt action and co-operation with the Ministry of War Transport both in New York and Washington the Maritime Commission and various U. S. government departments. Suspicious waterfront characters, 3. and establishment had been identified and necessary repressive action taken. In the process of achieving this very considerable goodwill had been created between British and U.S. officials masters and crews and the general public. It was therefore suggested to the Security Executive in London that it would be advisable to extend the C.S.O organization throughout South Anerlca. A plan was drawn up the vital ports selected and it was decided that Sir Connop Guthrie who had previous experience of South American conditions and h had in addition been working for several snaths in the Security Division on problems connected with snips crews should undertake the organizing tour on Mr. Stephenson's behalf.  i Sir Connop Guthrie accompanied by lir. Sarri-Davles toured the South American continent by air from mid-August to n id-Cctobcr 1941 and successfully appointed Consular Security Officers in twenty-six ports.  During this Journey special stress was placed on tho examination of security conditions in the Venezuelan and Colombian oil fielus and Incidentally in British Guiana on the subject of bauxite ehipnents. It may be added that at this stage the entire C.S.O. organization was placed on a better footing with the Havel Reporting Officers organization which came under the command of C.-in-C. America Best Indies Station .  3. U.S. Liaison. The first six Bonths of 1941 will be remembered in the U.S.A as a period of constant strife and strikes in heavy Industries and considerable snti-Britlsh agitation among a-uritime workers and on the  THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL OOCUWlEN'l RETAINED  IN DEPARTMENT UNDERSECTION 3 4 OT THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1t58, 4. waterfront. This appeared to be a concerted move to strangle the American war effort on Britain s behalf. The very considerable study that had been made by the Security Division of disturbing elements in industry and on the waterfront among crew members and especially among the Communist Party was at this time of considerable value to the numerous U. S. authorities who were greatly concerned at this outburst of obstructionism. While only a few cases of minor sabotage occurred the general disruption of American industry was probably the greatest single act of prepared sabotage that has ever occurred. The fact that the Security Division had very early started to make a continuing study of subversive individuals and elements proved a valuable asset in dealing with the outbreaks after they occurred.  Upon the entry of the U.S.A. in the war there was Em almost hysterical tightening up of security measures everywhere throughout the country. Certain policing and supervision which had previously been undertaken or Inspired by the Security Division were of course taken over by the appropriate U. รยง. authority. While these authorities disposed of numbers of staff far in excess of any that the Security Division could ever have had available on the other hand the U. S. authorities were completely inexperienced and guileless as to how security should be organized and implemented. Thus while certain activities in the field greatly decreased the Security division having been the pioneer found itself increasingly involved with the laying down of security policy and rendering technical advice as to how security measures could be best achieved. T0day a very close liaison exists with all U. S. civilian departments the Army and the Navy and their subsidiary organizations on all matters concerned with security. It can be safely stated that few major decisions regarding the installation or organization of security are taken without the help and advice of Security Co-ordination. This has naturally enabled the Director to suggest many measures which although controlled and undertaken by the U. S. authorities almost wholly benefit British interests. A notable example is the very special guard and police arrangements now made whenever an important troop transport calls, 5  at a U. S. port. The system in use today is one developed by the C.S.O.  organization to guard the Queen Elizabeth on one of her early calls in  San Francisco.' '  4. Later Developments. Prior to the spring of 1942 all communications from the Security Division in the shape of telegrams and reports had been routed to M.I.6 Headquarters in London although the majority of them were subsequently re-routed to the Office of the Security Executive. It was to relieve M.I.6 Headquarters of the pressure involved in acting as a channel for communications which were not of immediate M.I.6 interest that it was arranged early in 1942 that the Directorate of Security Co-ordination should have direct access In the matter of communications to the Security Executive in London. On April 19th 1942 the Security Division began to correspond direct with the Security Executive on all subjects of security interest except a enemy espionage and sabotage and b Communism and Labour matters in the U.S. Cables and reports on the latter continued to go as formerly to M.I.6 Headquarters which continued to re-route them to M.I.5. . Towards the end of the year the Director of  Security Co-ordination was appointed M.I.5 representative in the Western Hemisphere and as a result arrangements were made whereby Security Co-ordination proceeded to communicate direct with the Security Service   M.I.5 on all subjects of interest to that Service including those mentioned above. The establishment of the Consular Security officer systems the vetting of Allied and British personnel the extension of factory security from the actual physical protection of undertakings under British contract to include a watching brief on the security of all 1end-1ease production had by midsummer of 1942 established the Division s  - -0n May 19th 1942 Mr. Winston Churchill wrote to Lord Swinton  then Chairman of the Security Executive thanking him for the interesting account of the successful work undertaken by the Security Division in connection with the visits of the Queen Elizabeth and the Aquitania to San Francisco and the Aquitania and Cathay to New York. All concerned must have done their work very well added the Prime Minister and I am glad that the fullest co-operation of the United States authorities was secured., 6. security experience. It was therefore natural that new security tasks as they arose and became urgent should be assigned to it. Perhaps most important was the development of the Industrial Security Organization throughout South America. Like the Consular Security Organization this was entirely the creation of Security Co-Ordination to whom credit must go for the conception of its scope and operation. Throughout the year 1941 and the early part of 1942 the Director had repeatedly urged upon the various authorities in London the dangers to which the sources of strategic raw material in South America were exposed by reason of the operation of enemy espionage and other subversive activities in that part of the continent in spite of the fact that during this initial period the Americans did not seem to entertain any real appreciation of the potential threat to allied supplies which these activities constituted. Official British policy in this regard had hitherto been one of laissez-faire designed to avoid the risk of upsetting the Latin American countries and of acting against the wishes of the U. S. State Department who preferred to rely upon normal relations and in particular the economic control over the Latin American governments which such intercourse conferred upon them in order to keep enemy subversive activities in check. The discovery of a large espionage ring in Brazil in the early months of 1942 showed how ineffective were these U. s. official measures. In June 1942 the British Chiefs of Staff in London telegraphed the British Joint Staff Mission in Washington recommending the establishment of a security organization in South America whose members would be trained in the protection of key points and sabotage. The Chiefs of Staff further recommended to the Ministers concerned in London that the resources of both SIS and SOE should be made available for this purpose making clear that joint efforts which it was hoped to combine with those of the appropriate American authorities would be directed solely against enemy or enemy controlled nationals and organizations. The Chiefs of Staff further recommended that Security Co-Ordination should extend their overt security measures in this way and, this recommendation was subsequently endorsed by Mr. Duff Cooper as Chairman of the Security Executive and by Sir Edward Bridges on behalf of the War Cabinet.  In view of U S jealousy of any trespassing on their preserves in Latin America the British Joint Staff Mission thought it wise not to undertake direct action with the U. S. Chiefs of Staff until the mission had done everything possible to prepare the ground beforehand. It proved impossible however to make any progress on these lines. Accordingly after consultation with the Embassy the Joint Staff Mission circulated to the d. S. Chiefs of Staff a paper based on the recommendations of the Chiefs of Staff in London and also on information supplied by Security Co-Ordination which drew attention to the dangers of Axis sabotage against important war supplies in Latin America. This paper dealt with overt security measures and contained a request for information as to which U. S. organization Security Co-Ordination should get into  touch for the purpose of carrying out the Chiefs of Staff's recommendations.  The initial reaction of the U. S. Chiefs of Staff was disappointing as their attitude was clearly that they considered security measures in Latin America to be a matter concerning the U.S.A. and on in which British interests should not interfere. At the same time the  U. S. Chiefs indicated that they fully recognized the importance of appropriate security measures in Latin America and that the American Intelligence Command organization which functioned under the Military Intelligence Division of the U. S. General Staff would undertake the programme which was considered to be adequate to meet the situation. For such liaison as might be considered necessary with British interests an officer from this organization was designated. This programme did not achieve in practice the expectation which was entertained of it and some months later in December 1942 the U. S. Chiefs of Staff modified their original attitude while the  U. S. Army entered into a new agreement with the F.B.I. under which internal security of all strategic plants of U. S. concerns in Latin America was in future to be the responsibility of the Bureau and not of the intelligence Command of the Amy. Steps were immediately, taken by the Security Division to establish complete liaison with the F.B.I. both in Washington and in South America and this  arrangement has proceeded most satisfactorily.  Meanwhile Security Co-Ordination arranged for the introduction of a security course into the curriculum of the training school in Canada and also took steps to obtain recruits from various British companies in South America. In August 1942 the first three recruits completed their training and by the end of the year a comprehensive network of Industrial Security Officers recruited from the personnel of British controlled firms and trained in special anti-sabotage operations was divided into six zones under Chief Industrial Security Officers. This organization working closely with the Consular Security Officers on the South American coast is now in conjunction also with the Americans affording full security coverage to the whole sub continent.  At the same time the Division was entrusted with responsibility for the physical protection of all British Missions in the United States and the security checking of their personnel. Though a natural development of C.S.O. work rather than a fresh function the duties connected with the guarding of the giant transports which have moved constantly back and forth from United States ports during the last half year also assumed new proportions. Even more recently the Security Division was called in in an expert advisory capacity on the general security of the convoy assembly port of Halifax and a visit by one of its officers in January 1943 was instrumental in securing the introduction of stricter protective measures for troopships loading in Canadian ports.  Parallel with these changes came a corresponding alteration in the status and character of the Division as viewed by the U. S. Departments and Services. This office has now become generally regarded by them as the recognized custodian operating openly and officially of the security of British interests in the United States and South America. In the development of security protection for British industrial interests in South America the closest collaboration both in Washington and in the field has been maintained with the F.B.I. which is charged with a similar, task in relation to American companies. The development of relations with those sections of the U. S. Office of Naval Intelligence dealing with shipping security matters is indicative of the same tendency. Liaison was originally established through N.I.D. 18 and greatly strengthened by a conference held in Washington in October 1942 between a representative of Security Co- Ordination and officers of the Latin American sections in O.N.I. The stage has now been reached when the daily flow of information btween O.N.I. and the Security Division warrants the appointment of a special liaison officer. Through contacts with the New York F.B.I. and Police with G.2 and the Provost Marshal's Office with the Coast Guard and Navy as also with other British Missions a similar growth of recognition and a desire to exchange information and experience on a reciprocal basis has been noted., 8. II. FUNCTIONS AND ORGANIZATION Under the immediate direction of Sir Connop Guthrie the Security Division of Security Co-ordination operates through the follo dng sections  1. U. S. and Canadian Liaison. 2. Consular Security Organization in U.S.A. 3. Consular Security Organization in South America. 4. Industrial Security Organization in South America. 5. Staff and Accounts. 6. Labour and Communism. 7. Reporting. 8. Dock Fire Inspection. 9. Factory Security. 10. Credit Investigation. 11. Personnel Investigation for Allied Armed Forces. 12. Washington Office. 1. Section A.l. U.S. and Canadian Liaison. This Section is primarily the liaison on all routine matters between Security Co-ordination and some twenty American and Canadian law enforcement agencies including the F.B.I. the R.O.M.P. various City and State Police Departments the U.S. and Canadian Immigration Services the U.S. Treasury the Director of Internment Operations the local offices of U.S. Naval Military and Air Intelligence etc. The work of this Section prior to the U.S. entry in the war consisted mainly in securing semi-confidential and secret intelligence information and  securing co-operation from the appropriate departments to obtain information or action required by Security Co-ordination. Since the-end of 1941 the liaison has become extremely close with all U.S. departments and the painstaking efforts of the previous months to secure open-minded and openhanded collaboration have borne fruit.  During the year 1942 the staff of U.S. Army G.2 has been considerably increased and frequent calls from their special agents are, 9.' received by this Section. G.2 depend on this Section entirely for local information regarding military districts in Canada bordering on the Second Service Command. C 2 have in turn conducted inquiries for this Section not falling within the scope of the F.B.I. Visiting British and Canadian officers have been introduced advantageously to senior G.2 officers on Governors Island.  2. SectionB.j..iny. r . ai This Section acts as the co-ordinating unit for all Consular Security Officers in North America. These C.S.O.'s are stationed in fourteen U.S. ports. With the exception of New York where the C.S.O. has seven assistants there is only one man in each port. The Section is in direct control of all the C.S.O.'s in. the above ports. Their reports are sent to New York and thence to London or to the requisite U.S. authorities. Close contact is also kept with the various Consulates in which C.S.O.'s are stationed these officers being' under the local jurisdiction for administrative and official reasons of their Consuls. In fact however their instructions all are sent from New York.  With the entry of the U.S.A. into the war and especially since by Presidential Order the U.S. Secretary of the Navy and the U.S. Coast Guard were made responsible for port security the position of Security division and the C.S.O. organization in the U.S.A. has been strengthened. This is largely due to the expressed desire of the U.S. authorities concerned that Security Co-ordination continue to look after British and Allied Ships under charter to the Ministry of War Transport. In short the Security division which had to operate more or less unofficially before December 1941 although with the tacit consent of the U.S. authorities is now able to operate officially and to make and maintain official contacts with U.S. authorities.  It should be emphasized that this Section and all Consular Security Officers under its control have no work of an Intelligence nature uties consist of physical security measures for ships in port anti-sabotage precautions welfare of officers and crew and assistance in most ports to the Consuls General in crew problems. All undercover work was discontinued some months ago and one of the strictest injunctions, to C.S.O.1s is that they are not to become involved in any way with intelligence work of an undercover nature.  One of the chief responsibilities of this section has been the greatly Increased visits of British troop ships and transports from the monster vessels down. Security guards have been arranged not only In the port of New York but also in Boston Norfolk Newport News and San Francisco ' 'hanks to excellent co-operation received from the American authorities procedure has followed the well established lines originally developed in New Tork. In the port of Norfolk however where the  H.M.T. Maurentania1' was in the Naval Drydock and military guards subsequently out of the question the Royal Navy promptly supplied an adequate number of officers petty officers and ratings. There is no doubt that the supply and maintenance of this security guard system has been of utmost importance and has probably been the means in more than one instance of a transport being saved for future service. While the American authorities supply the security guard the principle of joint responsibility has been maintained in the protection of these large vessels and Consular Security Officers are looked to by the U.S. guards for advice and assistance. C.S.O.'s also maintain liaison  between the Masters and Officers of the 1.3. guard detail.  During November and December 1942 was able to make an inspection trip covering the work of C.S.O.'s at Seattle Portland Ore San Francisco San Pedro Houston Galveston Port Arthur New Orleans Mobile Tampa and Savannah. Without exception the C.S.O.'s maintained excellent relations with the U.S. authorities and many of the latter have given the opinion that the protection of British ships was thus better carried out than it could possibly have been by the United States authorities themselves who in view.of their manifold responsibilities could not have given such detailed attention to them. With regard to vigilance against sabotage U.S. agencies in all ports agreed that although organized sabotage has been noticeably absent in the United States during the past year this was not for want of a comprehensive plan on the part of the enemy. It was felt that such a plan might well be reserved against a time when the submarine campaign.begins to fail.  THIS ISACOPY 1 AC 988 PUE -IC rECORDS, 11. Unflagging watchfulness has therefore been impressed on all C.S.O.'s.  It is gratifying to note that an increasing number of British and Allied ships visited are well equipped with anti-sabotage devices such as the screening of ventilators adequate lighting sealing of goosenecks etc. The original suspicion of security measures met with on the part of certain Masters has also happily disappeared. Meanwhile standard ship security precautions have been issued from Washington for the whole of the United States. Comparing these with British rules they do not in some respects go far enough it is thought. C.S.O.'s have therefore been instructed on the necessary additional measures.  3. Section B.2. Consular Security Organization in South Americ-.a. As in the U.S.A. all C.S.O.'s are British subjects selected for their knowledge of local conditions and languages and their shipping experience. 1 he ports in which they serve handle more than 60% of the British and Allied shipping volume in South America.  The primary task of these C.S.O.'s was the provision of new or revised Anti-Sabotage reulations for the ports in which they were stationed. In every case the Anti-Sabotage Regulations were evolved in collaboration with the local British and Allied Consuls the Shipping Agents of the Port and the local Authorities. The task of getting these Regulations agreed to by all the different authorities involved was a long and arduous one. It was found necessary to reconcile the numerous conflicting interests and claims existing between all the many and varied Government Departments Consuls Commercial interests etc. concerned with shipping matters. In every port the regulations were adopted and amplified to meet the particular dangers and conditions which existed and which differ widely from country to country and from port to port in South America.  The task of maintaining and supervising the enforcement of these regulations is a continuing and in some of the larger ports a full-time job. New problems caused by the changing conditions of the war are constantly arising and must be met and overcome. Each C.S.O. is consistently engaged in endeavouring to raise the standard of shipping security conditions in his port  a continuing and never-ending, 12  task.  At the same time the work being done automatically produces as a sort of by-product a steady flow of information and intelligence of a widely diversified character. This is passed to New York where it is given appropriate distribution either to British Missions in the U.S. or to local U.S Authorities or else to the appropriate Departments of State and Ministries in the U.K.  All the C.S.O. s may males local distribution which includes the Naval Staff Officer Intelligence in their area the local M.I.6 or  S.O.E. Representative or Agent the local British Consul and Representative the local N.R.O. the local U.S. Naval Observer the local Representative of the Ministry of War Transport or D.E.M.S. Officer etc. etc. The work of the C.S.0. s in South America falls into three main divisionss    a Physical Security of Shipping dock areas.  b Welfare of crews.  c Waterfront Intelligence.work. Examples of all three of the above will be found in the following special cases.   1 rhe C.S.O.'s at several ports have played a leading part in the establishment of volunteer patrols for British and Allied vessels organized from amongst the ranks of the British and Allied communities in their areas eg. Montevideo Rio Grande do Sul Bahia .  2 The C.S.O. at Maracaibo Venezuela succeeded in having a standard set of anti-sabotage precautions adopted for the three Lake Tanker Fleets of the three major oil companies operating in Venezuela viz. Shell Standard and Gulf.  3 Seamen's Welfare improvements too numerous to mention have been effected by the C.S.O.'s in South America.  4 The C.S.O.'s in nearly every port have obtained improvement in the security of information regarding shipping movements in their area. Indiscreet cables soot and received by agents and consignees have been reported to New York and satisfactory action obtained. Local Governmental Regulations necessitating public disclosure of arrivals and departures, 13. of vessels have in many cases been altered or revoked at the instance of the C.S.O. Many pro-Axis Captains of the Ports and Maritime Police Officials have been removed through the efforts and reports of C.S.O. 3.   รยง In the vital and important port of Buenos Aires the C.S.O. played a leading part in obtaining' the provision of armed Argentinian Maritime police guards for all British and Allied vessels in the port.   6 In Rio de Janeiro the C.S.O. supervises a special Corps of Consular Ships' Watchmen. Members of this orps when they can be spared are borrowed by the local U.S. Shipping Security Officer to guard U.S. Merchant vessels. The main effect of the U.S. entry into the war upon the C.S.O. in South America has been the necessity of integrating the activities of these officers with the U.S. Naval Officers who are being' appointed to safeguard the security of U.S flag vessels in the ports of South America.  Negotiations were entered into in a Conference held in Jamaica during February 1942 and attended by Sir Connop Guthrie between representatives of the U.S. Office of Naval Intelligence and British Naval and Security Representatives towards establishing joint shipping security arrangements. As a result of the resolutions adopted at this Conference subsequently ratified by the Admiralty and the U.S. Navy Department mechanisms are now being set up which provide for the fullest collaboration and mutual assistance between British and U.S. officials charged with obtaining adequate security measures for United Nations Merchant vessels in South America.  An obvious step towards the attainment of a greater degree of security for United Nations Merchant Shipping lies in the adoption of a satisfactory standard set of Anti-Sabotage Precautions applicable to all United Nations vessels trading to the ports of South America. Towards the attainment of this end this Section has over a period of months and drawing on the experience of the officersunder its control evolved such a set of Standard Precautions. In it are embodied the bulk of the precautions commonly found necessary in the ports of the Americas together with all the measures called for in the various directions and instructions issued by the Admiralty the Ministry of War Transport and the Foreign Office since the commencement of the war. This standard, set of Anti-Sabotage Precuations was accepted and endorsed without alteration by the Admiralty the Ministry of War Transport and the Foreign Office and the Security Division New York was requested to distribute printed supplies to the British Naval and Consular Authorities throughout South America. These Precautions have now been adopted by the U.S. Naval Authorities for their own use in South American ports. A translation into Portuguese by the C.S.O. in Rio Grande Brazil has also been  adopted by the U.S. Naval Observer and has been used by the Brazilian Authorities for ships at that port.  The development and extension of the work undertaken by the C.SO.'s and the necessity for preserving a close contact between C.S.O.'s and headquarters called for a stiffening of the organization by the introduction of Supervisory Consular Security Officers for selected areas. One such appointment was made for Brazil and another for the West Coast of South America these being the areas in which the greatest need existed for guidance and encouragement of the men in the ports. In addition to his own work as Supervisory C.S.O. the officer appointed to Brazil also functions as Chief Industrial Security Officer in connection with the Industrial Security Scheme controlled by Section B.3 q v. in New York.  The liaison duties of C.S.O.'s have extended with the increasing establishment of Security organizations by the U.S. the contact which C.S.O.'s maintain with their U.S. Naval opposite numbers being of the closest. In a number of cases the C.S.O. enjoys the use of a desk in the  U.S. Naval Officer's office and/or vice versa. Towards the end of the year 1942 the interchange of information between this office and O.N.I. on shipping security matters had increased to a point where it was no longer convenient for N.I.D. 18 to act as intermediary and after discussions in Washington and New York direct communication was established between Section B.2 and the appropriate sections of O.N.I. The close liaison thus established has led to a very great increase in the volume of O.N.I. reports reaching the Section during the month of January this exceeded 100 reports and the volume is steadily increasing. Reciprocally copies of all our London reports which might interest O.N.I. are sent to them as well as selected reports, 15  from G.S.O.'s. C.S.O.'s ha\re also become more deeply concerned in connection with seamen's welfare ashore and have taken a leading part in collaboration with other British officials in trying' to get satisfactory arrangements made. A large measure of success has attended their efforts.  A great deal of work was undertaken during 1942 in collaboration with local officials to strengthen the conditions of Port Security according to the possibilities in each place and a fair degree of success was achieved. Leakage of information through the issue of passenger tickets and information given t passengers was also dealt with and in each port arrangements were made to ensure the maximum degree of secrecy in this regard.  In addition to these duties C.S.O.'s are being called upon to interest themselves in an increasingly wide range of subjects he problem of the carriage of contraband through the blockade by Spanish ships inevitably became involved with Security work and the Security division in New York basing their actions on advice received from C.S.O.'s particularly C.S.O. Buenos Aires were in some measure instrumental in this whole question being thoroughly reviewed and firmer action being taken both with regard to the issue of Navicerts and the attempt to trace sources of and hiding places for contraband. As a temporary measure it has been agreed that C.S.O.'s may assist Consular officials in checking cargoes carried by Spanish ships insofar as this work does not interfere with normal duties in connection with ensuring the security of British and Allied tonnage.  In Curacao the C.S.O. took an active part in helping to settle a long-standing dispute between a group of some 400 Chinese seamen the Dutch authorities and Maracaibo Lake Tanker officials culminating in an amicable arrangement being reached under the guidance of the Chinese Consul General from Havana.  In Aruba the C.S.O arranged for a doctor to visit each vessel  for treating men requiring minor medical attention thus avoiding the  long delays of vessels which had arisen through the necessity for men to  go ashore and await attention by the port doctor.  In Bahia the C.S.O. acted as Ship's Agent for entry clearing, 16. and care of a large troop-carrying' convoy which put in there in preparation  for the original expedition to North Africa and for-his work was highly  complimented by the Naval Officer in charge of the escort as well as by H.M. Consul.  In Panama the C.S.O. was instrumental in having hydrogen-filled barrage balloons replaced by helium-filled ones where danger to shipping and the Locks in the Canal might have been incurred in the event of their being shot down.  These examples indicate the variety of subjects now occupying the attention of C.S.O.'s in addition to their routine care of ship inspection port security crew welfare waterfront intelligence investigation of crew troubles rounding up of deserters supervision of corps of ships' watchmen prevention of leakage of information warning crews against undesirable bars and brothels etc.  It is submitted that the C.S.O. Organization in South Araerica in addition to fulfilling its functions now constitutes a very useful supplement to Consular and Naval organizations insofar as all matters affecting British Merchant Shipping are concerned.  4. Section B. 3. Industrial Security 0.rteaplza-tiQn. iii. South .Aaerisa. This Section which is responsible for the organization and administration of the South American Industrial Security Scheme became part of the Security Civision of British Security Co-ordination in November 1942. It had existed and operated for several months previously under the auspices of S.O.E. and the Section's two officers at the time of transfer. Captain Mostyn Davies and Mr. Kenneth ilson have been seconded to Security Executive. Ihey have been joined by Arthur Bett a former Consular Security Officer.  The Section's functions have been primarily two   i Recruiting and training of Industrial Security Officers from British interests engaged in the production and transport of strategic raw materials in South America.  ii Development of organization in South America and responsibility for the efficient application of security plans by British companies. Recruiting depends on harmony ofaction between New York which  administers the scheme London which contacts the boards of companies  /, 17   various representatives of Britis Security o-ordination in South America  who contactthe men in the field and the military school in Canada   which doesthe actual training .  Much of the credit for the success of the scheme must go to the school. This establishment is in the nature of a camp situated in a country district away from unnecessary distraction where students are instructed largely from the enemy agent's point of view in order that they may be familiar with the weapons likely to be used against them and with the necessary counter-measures. The training consists of lectures practical demonstrations and field schemes including visits to industrial plants. Students are thus enabled to understand that their task is not only an individual one but part of the complete war effort.  For purposes of the scheme. South America has been divided into six zones. A Chief Industrial SeCurity Officer is to be stationed in all but one to co-ordinate and guide operations in his territory. Four C.I.S.O.'s have already been appointed and three of them are at work.  On completion of their training at the school the company representatives who are appointedIndustrial SecurityOfficers  prepare reports on the security of their particular concerns. These reports are discussed with them in New York and form the basis for preliminary instructions covering such matters as checking the antecedents of work people introducing pass systems protecting vulnerable points by armed guards walls high tension wires or other means and developing' an informant service designed to givethe company prior knowledge of any sabotage or subversion contemplated by the enemy.  Subsequently the I.S.O.'s submit progress reports and more detailed information on the activities of each concern with plans and photographs of vulnerable points. In this way a detailed security plan is built up for each co pany under the local guidance of the Chief Industrial Security Officer.  Since the inception of the scheme Industrial Security  Officers have been trained and are at work. In many cases their companies' installations may already be regarded as effectively protected against  enemy activity. With small exceptions all British railways power, 18. companies oilfields frigorificos essential mineral undertakings and merchant houses have been brought into the scheme. The merchant houses have been covered partly to protect their warehouses where vital materials may be stored partly on account of their interests in cotton wool hemp  and flax production but principally to build up a widespread informant  service for safeguarding the outflow of vital raw materials. A maximum  of co-operation has been received from these houses and a chain of men  drawn from them now covers the entire West Coast of South America.  The work of Industrial Security Officers and Consular Security Officers has been integrated as much as possible and cordial co-operation is developing.  The administrative zones are as follows  Zone A. Peru. Bolivia and North Chile. C.I.S.O. E.R. Lingeman in Lima and La Paz is attached to the British missions as Economic Adviser. Full-time assistant C.A. Randall Lima. Part-time assistant T.D. Lonsdale La Paz.  Zone B. Brazil. C.I.S.O. William Brook also Supervisory Consular Security Officer for the East Coast of South America with Headquarters at the British Consulate General Rio de Janeiro.  Zone C. Colombia. Venezuela and Ecuador. C.I.S.O. Alan  McIntosh to be attached to the British Legations in Bogota Caracas and  Quito. Headquarters in Bogota but time divided among the three countries.  Zone D. British Guiana. British Guiana as a British colony falls under Security Service and our I.S.O.'s there work under the Defence Security Officer.  Zone E. Southern Chile. C.I.S.O. Mr. John Henderson of Balfour Williamson. Zone F. Argentina Uruguay and Paraguay. C.I.S.O. B.A. Cash-Reed who has not yet taken up his duties as economic attache H.M. Legation Montevideo. The Federal Bureau of Investigation has finally been charged by the United States Government with the task of developing security measures for United States interests in South America. Agreement has been reached with the F.B.I. on the general lines of collaboration which will be particularly close between C.I.S.O.'s and their opposite numbers in the F.B.I. The interests of each service have been clearly defined and, 19  friendly and efficient teamwork within the agreed limits is anticipated.  5. Section C. Staff and. Accounts. This Section deals with routine managerial duties of the office concerning staff salaries and finance as well as the co-ordination of the work of the different sections particularly in dealings with the British Ministry of Supply Mission the Embassy and other British Missions. In addition this Section deals with special enquiries and requests submitted by the Bnbassy the Consulate-General the British Ministry of Supply Mission. Inquiries regarding the commercial standing and political sympathies of all firms or individuals seeking to do business with the British Ministry of Supply Mission or other Missions are also handled by this Section.  On October 1 1942 the Security Division became responsible  for direct payment of all salaries and expenses of its New York Washington and Detroit staffs including the C.S.O. organization in North America and the Internal Security staffs in New York and Washington which were taken over by the Security Division last September.  Payrolls were put into operation to cover Administrative salaries and expenses in New York and in Washington. Separate payrolls and banking arrangements were established to deal with the Internal Security staffs in both offices the Detroit staff being included on the Washington payroll. Modifications were introduced into the system of accounts by which the disbursements and finances of the Security Division are supervised by the New York Office., 20. The disbursements on account of Administrative salaries and expenses and on Internal Security amounted uring the month of December 1942 to  New York -Administrative salaries and expenses including G.S.O. organization- '2 618.95 Internal Security- 8 468.19  Washington -Administrative salaries and expenses--- 2 856.15 Internal Security-34 886.30  Detroit -Internal Security--1.371.14 TOTAL- - 80 203.73 The sources of the above funds disbursed by the Security Division during the same month were as follows  M.I.cr------ 14 000.00 17.45% British Ministry of SupplyMission- 66 203.73 82.55% TOTAL- 80 203.73 For administration convenience and to satisfy Treasury requirements as from April 11 1943 the Security Division d aws its funds direct from the Embassy in Washington and accounts direct to the S curity Executive in London.  6. Section D.l. Labour and Corrmunism. This Section is responsible for watching Labour Communist and other subversive activities as they affect the interests of Security. In the past prior to February 1942 a number of undercover agents were employed in the above fields. More recently greater emphasis has been placed on Communist activities in the entire Western Hemisphere while activities on U.S. labour matters have been reduced since it is felt that this is more of an American domestic problem than before. However interest is still being maintained in Labour movements wliich show Radical or more generally political influences.  While the above work has considerable current interest and interlocks with certain M.I.6 activities its chief value is on a longrange basis. In agreement with the Security Executive London a continuing, 21.  study is therefore being made of all Labour activities and personalities which may be expected to create agitation . both here and in the U.K. in the period of post-war re-adjustment.  In addition this Sections maintains liaison with various U.S. Departments Military and Naval Intelligence Immigration concerning labour problems exchanging information and views.  Since direct communication with Security Service has been established all reports on American or Empire matters are now routed directly to SeCurity Service save when the report is in answer to a previous M.I.6 inquiry in which case the report is sent as heretofore.  Considerable attention has been paid during this period to Communism in South American countries and the closest liaison has in this respect been maintained with the M.I.6 organization which has forwarded to this Section reports from South American Stations and has sent these stations inquiries and comments from this section. In this respect a special memorandum on Communism in the Western Hemisphere was prepared at the end of the year and this has now been sent to 15 stations in South and Central America for their guidance in reporting on Communist activities.  Insofar as local activities are concerned the output of the Section has undoubtedly diminished as a result of the decision not to employ agents for even the best contacts with Government agencies cannot entirely replace the knowledge of an agent with inside information. Relations with the various United States agencies are good in particular with Local F.B.I. and the New York Police.  With regard to the Labour situation theposition is a little more Involved partly because the matter is more an American internal problem partly because of the lack of inside contacts and partly because of the increased interest which is officially being taken by the Foreign Office through the nomination of a Labour Attache.  The most important case dealt with during 1942 and one which is still current isthat of the Spanish Communists in the Western Hemisphere and their relations with Lurope in which full use has been made of M.I.6, 22. representatives in South America as well as of Imperial Sensorship stations in Trinidad Jamaica and Ber uda which are being kept informed of developments.  7. Section D 2. Reporting. This Section is responsible for the preparation of all reports to the Security Executive and of the majority of reports to the Security Service and it also distributes to other agencies in the Western Hemisphere. This Section also collaborates closely with the previous Section described above on the above subjects since the preparation of these reports requires exhaustive research and documentation. Regular monthly reports on Labour uonditions and Sabotage Activities are also compiled and transmitted both to London and local departments. Since April 1911 a total of some 2500 reports have been prepared many of them major studies of important issues such as U.S. Automobile Industry Relations between  A.F.L. and C.I.O. Greek Maritime Situation Security in Venezuelan Oil-ports Daily Worker attitude to Great Britain Submarine Refuelling in Southern Caribbean etc. In addition this Section maintains for reference a master index of all cases of plant and shipping accidents and sabotage reported in the U.S.A. When reports appear to touch the interests of other British Ministries such as the Foreign Office the Ministry of War Transport of  M. E.W. special copies are forwarded This scheme which has been approvedby Security Executive is intended to avoid difficulties arising from paper and labour shortage in the U.K. and has enabled Security division to bring its findings and suggestions promptly to the departments capable of action. This Section continues to prepare occasional reviews of submarine operations as affecting the Americas as well as monthly reports on sabotage and accident and on the labour situation in the United States. In a typical distribution copies of the former are passed to O.N.I.  N. I.D.18 D.N.I. Ottawa Jamaica R.C.M.P. and in the case of the labour report by London's special request to the Labour Attache at Washington., 23-. 8. Section D.T.A.X. .HnaJasg Usa Pricr to December 7 1941 this Section undertook a 24-hour inspection of all railroad yards terminals and deep-sea piers. Its primary duties were to establish and maintain liaison with the proper U.S. Authorities to watch for careless handling of Purchasing Commission materials for laxity in police and fire protection and to take steps to have these corrected. To this end contacts were made and maintainedwith Police Fire Coast Guard Dock and Army and Navy agencies in New York City and the neighbouring states. At the request of other sections of Security Co-ordination special investigations and inspections were carried out at various manufacturing plants and recommendations submitted for Fire Police and A.R.P. protection. Other investigations dealt with non-delivery of goods and their inadequate protection in transit. Finally a survey was made and basic reports compiled concerning fire protection on all railroadterminals and deep-sea piers where Lend-Lease and Purchasing Commission materials were handled in transit. The responsible authorities were approached where protection was found inadequate and their aid enlisted. With the advent of the United States into the War it was very clear that in due course the American Authorities would eventually assume active security control of railroad terminals and waterfront property. The first step in this direction took place in February 1942 when U.S. Naval Intelligence assumed responsibility for the security of all railroads. This Section continued to keep under observation all deep-sea piers where Lend-Lease and Purchasing Commission materials were in transit to ascertain that adequate Police and Fire protection was being maintained and to scrutinize cargo for signs of damage. To this end cordial relations are maintained with the Police Fire Coast Guard and Shipping Authroties in New York and Jersey City. In view of the huge area to be covered and the increasing difficulties of transport it has obviously not been possible for the Chief Inspector with his small staff to make a daily inspection of every pier. However efforts have been ma.de to cover each sailing point in New York Brooklyn Staten Island and Hoboken at least twice a week, 24. during daylight hours.  It is gratifying to note that the numerous reports submitted by this section to various sections of the British Ministry of War Transport and the British Air Commission on damaged cases resulting from careless handling and other causes produced a marked improvement towards the latter end of 1942. This especially applied to the packing of food products.  Advice is also received from time to time from the British Air Commission concerning arrivals of Secret Radio Equipment. As this type of material is classified 'Special and Top Stowage Cargo the authorities are not usually prepared to load it immediately upon arrival at the pier. In these cases arrangements are made by this Section with the U.S. Coast Guards and Pier Authorities for special and constant surveillance until the material is loaded.  9. Section D.T.Ax2j F toxy .ssd-4ri ty. Early in 1941 this Section had completed a survey of all British contracts placed with U.S. factories and the security conditions prevailing in the plants. A continuing effort ensued during the following nine months to make these factories security-minded. With the passage of the Lease-Lend Act and the increasing production programme for the  U.S. armed forces the War Department Internal Security Division expanded and started close liaison. By September the security position in plants had improved and it was recognized that with the maintenance of complete plant protection divisions in each U.S. Procurement District Branch Office staffed by commissioned officers and qualified investigators it would not be advisable to have a separate Security Division organization in the field With the object of economy and to avoid duplication of work it appeared better to establish close relations with the U.S. local offices. Through contacts in the office of the Under Secretary of War arrangements were completed along these lines and the U.S. Procurement Districts in each area instructed to co-operate fully with the Security Division on all matters of protection covering the followings   a Physical protection., 25   b Enforcement of regulations applying' to visitors.  c becking of employees.  d Guard Personnel.  e Investigation of suspected cases of sabotage.  f Reasons for slowing up of production.  g Subversive activities.  h Labour and general conditions applying. All surveys and recommendations made by U.S. authorities in connection with plants where there are direct or indirect British interests were supplied to the Security Division.  Relations with the various U.S. offices in Washington and local districts have been exceptionally good and full co-operation has been received. This has enabled this Section to have up-to-date records on all matters relating to plant protection in those companies in which there are British interests. Further the Section has had the assistance and reports of the U.S. Internal Security Division Washington and the U.S. Procurement District officers on any investigations respecting suspected sabotage since these departments have recognized the British interest in all matters relating to protection and which in any way affect anticipated production.  In March 1942 the supervision of the U.S. Internal Security Division was transferred from the Office of Under-Secretary of War to the office of the Provost Marshal. General with however the same Officers in charge.  The present activities of the Section coven   a Liaison with U.S. Provost Marshal General's office and Ordnance Department Security Division Washington also U.S. local Procurement offices.  b Exchange of plant security information with interested U.S. Government Departments.  c Protection and safety of 417 important plants where there are direct British contracts or from which Great Britain receives Lend-Lease materials.  d Contact with various British Ministry of Supply Mission Divisions and checking reports received from them.  e Study of the records of periodical inspection made at these plants and discussion with the U.S. authorities of the carrying out of recommendations.  f Investigation in conjunction with the U.S. authorities of subversive activities and suspected sabotage.  g Obtaining of first-hand information on the labour situation and on other secondary factors which may adversely affect production., The liaison work of this Section has been somewhat complicated by the transfer of responsibility for security measures in war plants from the U.S. Procurement Districts to the 9 Service Commands 4 Army Air Corps Districts 12 Naval Districts the Ordnance Department and the Chemical Warfare Department. These transfers have necessitated a large number of new contacts in particular with the Commanding Officers of the various Service Commands. Within the Ordnance Department itself a special Safety and Security Department with headquarters at Chicago has been established to supervise the 288 plants dealing with explosives. Very friendly relations have been established with this branch and every assistance with regard to the investigation of explosions and other matters of interest covered by them has bee promised. Results of a large number of such investigations for example at the Western Cartridge Company the Excel Foundry and Machine Tool Company and the Winchester Repeating Arms Company have already been supplied to us.  Since August 1942 the head of this Section has visited the headquarters of the First Service Command at Boston the Second at New York the Third at Baltimore the Fifth at Colombus Ohio the Sixth at Chicago and branches of these Commands at Springfield Mass. Providence  R. I. New Haven Conn. Philadelphia Pa. Pittsburgh Pa. Cleveland Ohio Cincinnati Ohio and St. Louis Mo. Despite the changes mentioned above the Provost Marshal-General office remains the Administrative Branch of Internal Security and frequent conferences are held with officers of that office who have provided us with exceptional facilities for obtaining information.  In several cases our conferences with the U.S. authorities have been of mutual value and the Section s suggestions and inquiries have given rise to innovations in procedure. Recently as a result of an inquiry concerning strikes and slow-downs in the First Service Command Area this Command decided to issue a weekly review of strikes labour conditions subversive activities and suspected sabotage within their purview. Endeavours are now being made to persuade other Commands to issue a similar bulletin. In the same way inquiries at Philadelphia concerning absenteeism have resulted in this problem being seriously, 27 studied by the Third Service Command. Inquiries instituted concerning the suspected sabotage of a Boston bomber delivered to England also revealed unsatisfactory records in connection with the crating work of an important packing firm. The Air Corps expressed their satisfaction that this case was brought to their notice and are now arranging for improved records and checking arrangements. In September 1942 the duties of the former section D.T.A.3 covering aircraft protection were transferred to this Section and a liaison was established with the British Air Commission similar to that maintained with the various divisions of the Ministry of Supply. 10. Section d.t.a.a. Qradit.JaxasUeaUgg. Tills Section is primarily concerned with four types of investigations  a Persons applying for visas to take up employment in the U.K. or British territories.  b British subjects conducting themselves in a questionable manner or on whom enquiries have been received from London or U.S. sources.  c Questionable persons other than British.  d Commercial investigations on behalf of the British Ministry of Supply Mission M.I.6 and other British Missions in the U.S. Since April 1941 approximately 6 500 investigations have been conducted of which about half were commercial enquiries on behalf of the M.1.6 branch of Security Co-ordination in connection with Axis commercial economic and blockade-evasion activities in the U.S.A. Numerous contacts are maintained with' official and business connections credit agencies banks private detective agencies etc. so as to secure comprehensive and quick reports on all enquiries. This Section has now taken over the supervision of the internal security of New York Missions. Under an Internal Security Officer and assistant and a night supervisor and three assistants guard and receptionist systems have been established throughout the British Ministry of Supply the British Information Services the British Political Warfare Mission the British Consulate Shipping Department and the Australian Mission the latter paid for by the Mission in question . To cover, 28  these offices a corps of 74 guards are employed divided into three groups day guards first night guards and second night guards some of whom are assigned to stationary and others to patrol duty. Night patrols are required to register hourly through the American District Telegraph Protective Agency. Patrol guards must examine all office doors desks filing cabinets safes etc. report any found unlocked and  remove loose documents papers or personal effects to the Office of Internal Security where they are placed under lock until the following morning.  Guards are also responsible for unnecessary lights for the observation of dimout regulations for the collection and incineration of confidential waste for meeting and escorting all incoming confidential couriers and they may also question the contents of packages brought into the buildings. These functions are carried out throughout the 32 floors occupied by the British Ministry of Supply and associated missions as well as at the offices of the other agencies above mentioned.  11 Section D.T.A.5. Personnel Investigation for Allied. Armed Forces.  This Section is responsible for the security vetting of non- British subjects proceeding to British territory or into British service including Allied Service recruits employees of commercial airlines or the Ferry Command technicians and special air passengers as well as of British volunteers recruited here for war-work in the U.K. Recruits for the Allied Armies Navies and Air Forces from all parts of the world have passed through the hands of this Section and in particular a steady stream has lately been flowing from South and Central America.  In these latter cases additional investigation is made through Consular Security Officers or M.I.6 representatives as well as normally through Security Co-ordination files and those of the F.B.I. and R.C.M.P. In view of the excellence of the latter it has been possible to cut down to a great extent the old system of checking by credit bureau.  Recruiting of personnel for the Civilian Technical Corps  ceased at the end of January 1942. Recruiting for the Royal Air Force, through the Canadian Aviation Bureau ceased for all practical purposes at the end of May. On the other hand personnel taken on by Pan American Airways shows a definite increase beginning in March 1942. Briefly and in a general way the following are the steps taken in vetting the large majority of personnel  a Fingerprints are obtained and cleared through either by the F.B.I. or the R.G.M.P. or both as the case may be.  b Names of applicants are cleared through Security Division and M.I.6 F.egistries Passport Control and against Reject Lists maintained by this Section.  c Applicants' histories and backgrounds are thoroughly investigated. With regard to the vetting of Allied Service personnel it has been agreed that the Allies themselves are in the best position to effect the preliminary vetting of their own nationals and of American \ citizens of Allied descent. This is done by the Security Officer of the Allied Military Mission concerned who questions the applicant and obtains recommendations from local patriotic societies priests and so on. When this has been done the applicant is fingerprinted and vetting carried out by the Section proceeds as indicated above. In connection with the Civilian Technical Corps this Section has also been active in verifying the reasons given by members of this organization who have requested repatriation to the United States from the United Kingdom. Reasons given are generally illness in the family destitution etc. The personnel taken on by the Royal Air Force Ferry Command is not vetted by this Section. This work is done by the Royal Air Force Ferry Command Security Officer. On the other hand the names and particulars of these recruits are passed through this Section for clearing through its Reject List Security Co-ordination Registries etc. and any derogatory information brought to light by this check is indicated to the Royal Air Force Ferr3r Command Security Officer. Since August 1941 when this Section was instituted a total of about 12 000 investigations have been conducted. Generally speaking this Section receives excellent co-operation from the various Allied Missions in the United States and Canada. Perhaps, 30  because they lack camp facilities in Canada where volunteers can await security clearance the French are perhaps more anxious to send tneir volunteers over as quickly as possible to avoid expense and inclined to think that each is a special case. Thile they have not said so it is felt that they consider this security vetting an unnecessary hardship. In all fairness to the French Delegation here however it should be mentioned that their position is often complicated by the fact that they receive conflicting instructions from their London headquarters. Other Allies seem to welcome security vetting and the Norwegians and Dutch have made use of fingerprinting requirements to the extent of taking extra prints for identification purposes.  12. f/ashiarton Office. This office has nowachieved a considerable measure of success in its new responsibility for the security of all British Missions in Washington During the initial phase of internal security ox-ganization many difficulties and differences had to be overcome. Security was regarded with some suspicion by a few of the Missions and on first approach was not received with enthusiasm. In the summer of 1942 however. Sir Connop Guthrie met all the heads in conference and explained the purpose and objectives. From this point on the actual realization of a security control was carried out without hitch by the Chief Security Officer Lt.-Colonel K.M. Bourae. At present a general willingness to co-operate has replaced the former suspicion and this will be undoubtedly improved as the objective is now understood.  The chief functions of internal security in Wasliington are   a The guarding of missions.  b The vetting of personnel.  c The supervision of safe-hand mail. With regard to a this office now supplies guards receptionists and escort messengers for 18 British Missions and 28 buildings in Washington. The total guard force under its control after a recent reorganization consists of 8 Sergeants one in Detroit one Sergeant Major and 214 guards  9 in Detroit . There are also 7 receptionists and 26 escort messengers. These include a reserve pool to allow for sick leaves and vacations., All personnel recruited by the Washington Missions is now  referred to this office which passes it forward to the proper sections in New York for investigation. At present the turn-over of personnel to be vetted amounts to about 25 a week. Since the expense and correspondence involved in vetting is heavy a review of this situation is now under way in Washington in an endeavour to lessen this figure.  Safe hand mail has also been put on a much improved and' more secure basis. This service is run from a central mail room in the Kedrick Building 1801 K Street and regulation and registration as well as the collection and delivery of such mail is now approved by this Section. Those using special messengers for high officials have -also been advised to adopt the Section's regulations.  This office maintains close touch with the F.B.I. and G.2 with regard to personnel matters and special inquiries from New. York. In return these U.S. contacts use this office for liaison and inquiry with regard to the personnel of British missions and other routine or secret matters. Excellent liaison is also maintained with the State Department and. the Metropolitan Police. The Section is in touch also with the Security Officer of the British Embassy and the Canadian 'South African Australian and New 2ealand Legations., 32 HI. SECURITY SERVICE REPRESENTATION 1. Bermuda West Indies British Guiana and Newfoundland. Prior to the setting up of Mr. Stephenson's establishment in New York in the summer of 1940 there was no machinery for the co-ordination of security measures in Bermuda and the British lest Indies and for the effective collating and distribution of intelligence collected in these areas. With the exception of Bermuda where security control was exercised by a subordinate colonial official virtually no steps were being taken to control the increasing volume of passenger traffic which was continuous in transit there. As Director of British Security Co-ordination in the United States it fell to Mr. Stephenson to play a considerable part in satisfying these deficiencies. The most important point was of course Bermuda where the Transatlantic Uppers began to call in each direction during the summer of 1940. In August of that year. Major H. M. Hyde was sent out from London to act as Censorship Security Officer and he together with Mr. G. Boulton now H.B.M. Vice-Consul in Port-au-Prince who was then living in Bermuda endeavoured to promote at the Clipper Base some measure of passenger control including interrogation and the examination of documents. With the substantial reinforcement of the Imperial Censorship Station in the autumn of the same year a small staff of linguists was made available for this purpose thus forming a Travellers' Censorship Unit. By this time Major Hyde was already sending regular reports to P.C.O. New York based on these operations. Although much useful information was collected in this way particularly from westbound Clipper passengers and the substance transmitted both to P.C.O. New York and to London the situation generally was far from satisfactory. Strictly speaking the Travellers' Censorship unit should by their terms of reference have confined themselves to putting questions to passengers arising out of documents carried and where passengers were not carrying any documents the Travellers Censorship officers were strictly speaking not entitled to interrogate at all. It was quite obvious however that if these terms had been faithfully, 33-. observed much useful intelligence would have been missed. In practice all passengers were interrogated in the time available irrespective of whether they were carrying documents or not. The position was aggravated by the peculiarly stubborn outlook adopted by the Governor of Bermuda end his Colonial Secretary who declined to accept the appointment of a properly accredited Security Officer from England. The Governor did however consent to being advised by a local Security Committee presided over by the original Chief Censor. The local Police Immigration and the C.-in-C.'s taff Officer Intelligence were represented on the Committee. In addition. Major Hyde was co-opted a member from the time of his arrival in Bermuda and Mr. Hamish Mitchell also attended from the time when he became Mr. Stephenson's representative later in the year. Unfortunately the Committee had no executive powers and its recommendations frequently fell on deaf ears. It is apparent that some measure of security control however faulty and misguided on occasion did exist in Bermuda by the end of 1940 by contrast the situation in the British West Indies was alarming. In this area as has already been emphasized control was virtually non existent. In the particular case of Trinidad the position was rendered acute by the decision of Pan American Airways to route the westbound Clippers during the winter months of 1940-41 by way of Portuguese Guinea Brazil and Trinidad. This unsatisfactory state of affairs was evident both to Mr. Stephenson and to Mr. E. S. Herbert the Director of Postal and Telegraph Censorship who visited Bermuda and the Test Indies in the autumn of 1940. During this visit Mr. Herbert discussed in particular both with Mr. Stephenson and the naval C.-in-C. Bermuda the dangers arising from the use to which Axis agents were undoubtedly putting the Clipper services for their communications with the western hemlisphere. On his return to London at the end of the year Mr. Herbert represented to the authorities the urgent need for the co-ordination and improvement of security intelligence work including Censorship and Contraband Control. hia neec was felt to involve a more scientific distribution of the material obtained from all the Intelligence organizations in the Caribbean area. It was also felt that the various local security, 34'. officers looked less to imperial interests than to the interests of their owi particular colony and that parochial considerations were frequently allowed to outweigh those of the Commonwealth This latter feature is well exemplified in the following extract from a report written by the security officer in Barbados at a time which must be regarded as very criticial in the history of the british Empires  There has been no occurrence in foreign countries or in the neighbouring Islands which would affect this island in the period under review. Barbados Intelligence Report 30 September 1940. In spite of the spirit of complacency reflected in this observation it is significant that between the outbreak of the war and the end of 1940 over 300 enemy aliens passed through the port of Barbados alone without any security action being taken by the colonial authorities. Following on further discussions in London between the various authorities interested the Secretary of State for the Colonies was able to announce in a circular telegram dated January 4 1941 and. addressed to the Colonial Governors in the area the appointment of two intelligence officers jointly representing M.I.5 and M.I.6. The one was to cover Jamaica the Bahamas and British Honduras and he was to make his headquarters at Jamaica the other was to cover Trinidad Barbados Windward Islands Leeward Islands and British Guiana with his headquarters at Trinidad. These two officers were to be responsible for the circulation of security intelligence material to the Colonial Governments concerned in their respective areas. In addition they were to maintain liaison with each other and with a similar officer in Bemuda also with the Naval Intelligence Staff in Jamaica and the Commander-in-Chief Bermuda besides with their own Headquarters which in the Western Hemisphere it was considered desirable should be in the office of the Director of Security Co-ordination in New York. They were also to be avMlable for consultation by the Governors in their areas on the pr blems arising out of security work generally and their salaries and expenses were to be borne on imperial funds. With regard to the treatment of enemy aliens and suspected, 35  neutrals a policy of stricter control was introduced the principle being that the onus should be on such persons to establish their harmlessness. In addition it was laid down that the costs in connection with internment and detention were to be borne by imperial funds. This last point was a great step forward since all the Colonial Governors were disinclined on principle to authorize the detention of suspects in view of the possibility that they might become a charge upon the funds of their Colony. Lt.-Colonel 1. Wren vfas appointed in charge of the Trinidad area and proceeded to take up his appointment in February 1941. He was followed about two months later by Lt.-Commander J. C. D. Harington R.N.V.R. for the Jamaica area. For the purposes of administration both these officers were subject to the immediate direction of Mr. Stephenson whose assumption of the title of Director of Security Co-ordination about this time facilitated these arrangements. The combination of M.I.5 and M.I.6 functions in these officers in the Caribbean area and their ultimate responsibility to Mr. Stephenson was a logical development arisingout of the events of the preceding months. It did however constitute an additional responsibility for Mr. Stephenson which could in no sense be said to have been desired for its own sake by him but was merely undertaken because there was no one else who was in a position to shoulder it at that time. It is significant that it was not until after the visit of the Naval Security Mission to the U.S.A. headedby Brigadier M. Craig R.M. in the summer of 1941 that Colonel G. L. Stratton who was a member of the Mission as representing M.I.5 was able to report on the implications of security requirements in British colonial possessions in the Western Hemisphere. In February and March 1941 Major Hyde visited Jamaica on behalf of Mr. Stephenson and was there able to arrange that the vast amount of security intelligence in the shape particularly of enemy and alien subversive activities in the Caribbean Gulf of Mexico and western seaboard of South America collected by the C.-in-C.'s Staff Officer Intelligence at Kingston through his network of Naval Reporting Officers should be made available to Security Co-ordination New York., 36  The subsequent visit of the Craig Mission encouraged and assisted by Mr. Stephenson resulted in measures which were considerably overdue. Detachments of Field Security Police were sent out to Jamaica Trinidad and Bermuda and in addition a properly accredited Defence Security Officer was appointed to the latter station by the Director' General of Security Services M.I.5 London. It followed that the joint M.I.5 and M.I.6 officers in Jamaica and Trinidad were no longer subordinate to the Director of Security Co-ordination but came directly under the orders of their respective headquarters in London. Security Co-ordination Hew York actually continued to give able assistance to security control in the West Indies and Bermuda owing to its special facilities in U.S.A. and South America. Its functions however towards M.I.5 representatives in the West Indies and Bermuda were henceforth limited to liaison information and advice. At the same time Colonel G. L. Stratton who had been a member of the Craig Mission was appointed Inspecting Security Officer under the direct and sole control of the Director General Security Services. It is not intended to describe the many difficulties which beset those endeavouring to promote imperial security measures in the various islands. They were far less acute in Jamaica than in Trinidad and in Bermuda in fact in the case of the two latter islands they were in some degree responsible for drastic changes in the Colonial administration. It should not however be forgotten that by the time the Director General of Security Services was able to assume direct control of his representatives in the West Indies and Bermuda a real measure of security control was in fact being exercised throughout. For this achievement much credit is due to the directing energy of Security Co-ordination Mew York. In particular by the autumn of 1941 three essential requirements had been largely implemented which had been almost totally lacking twelve months before namely  1. The effective control of the complicated network of passenger mail and freight carrying services by sea and air. 2. The proper enforcement of a unifora system of preventive security measures. 3 The scientific co-ordination of security intelligence at focal points in the area and its rapid transmission to the, 37.. authorities concerned for'action or information. Since the autumn of 1941 a number of security problems have arisen in British possessions in the Western Hemisphere. Most serious perhaps was the danger to which the bauxite mines and production plants in British uiana were exposed through the lack of adequate protection. Lt.-Colonel Wren had visited this colony soon after taking up his appointment and he drew the attention both of M.I.5 and of Security Co-ordination to the gravity of the situation there. These representatives led to the further visit early in 1942 of Sir Connop Guthrie and Colonel Stratton and as a result of their inspection and recommendations the fullest measures were taken. In addition a Defence Security Officer was appointed to Georgetown and a detachment of Field security Police was sent out to assist him. Similar appointments were made in the Leeward Islands the Bahamas and British Honduras. 2. Canada and Newfoundland.  a Canada. For the first year at least of the war the need for adequate security arrangements was as imperfectly understood in Canada as it was in the West Indies. The only official body which concerned itself at all with the problem was the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and their interest by reason of their constitution and terms of reference did not extend beyond security in the physical sense of affording police watch and protection to a few strategical points. The improved liaison which the Director of Security Co-ordination established with Commissioner S. T. Wood of the R.C.M.P. gradually made itself felt. Early in 1941 Superintendent E. W Bavin who had had many years of experience in this service was permanently attached to the Security Co-ordination staff. Conditions continued however to be far from satisfactory. In particular the lack of precautions in the vital eastern seaport of Halifax was alarming and facilitated the passing out of infomation on convoys by enemy agents. The Director of Security Co-ordination who had been pressing' for some constructive changes to be made was able to avail himself of the arrival in America of the Security Commission headed by Brigadier A. M. Craig. For the purpose of its visit to Canada Mr. Bavin was, 38  attached to the staff and his presence in Canada at tills time was of undoubted value to Brigadier Craig in making' his recommendations. The Craig Mission strongly recommended the institution of a security control service the declaration of certain parts of the Dominion as protected areas and the appointment of Security Officers to the key ports. These recommendations were strongly reinforced in a message from Mr. Churchill to the Canadian Prime Minister pointing out the advantage of an efficient security sendee centrally controlled y ith wide powers operating especially in ports and other key places and further offering every help in his power such as lending officers with special training and wartime experience. It only remains to add that although these recommendations were not followed by the Canadian Government in their entirety such of them as were implemented have improved internal security in the Dominion in the light of wartime requirements beyond measure.  In thefield of security Mr. Stephenson is in constant liaison with the Department of External Affairs the Military Intelligence Headquarters and the Canadian Postal and Telegraph Censorship in Ottavia besides the R.C.M.P. Regular opportunities for the exchange of information on security problems in conjunction with the Americans are afforded by the meetings of the Western Hemisphere Intelligence Committee on which Security Co-ordination the R.C.M.P. and the F.B.I. are all represented.  Mr. Stephenson has also placed the services of his organization at the disposal of the Canadian authorities in regard to proposals for the formation of a Security Executive in Canada. These proposals originated from a meeting of the Canadian Censorship Advisory Committee on Intelligence and Security of December 17 1942 when Group-Captain Stewart Director of Air Intelligence raised the question whether the Committee might not consider the general question of internal security with which most of Its members happen to be concerned. The Chairman pointed out that this was not possible as the terms of reference of that Committee only authorized it to deal with security in its relation to Censorship. After further discussion attention was drawn to the obvious fact that questions often arose affecting security which were not related to censorship and that while the services were concerned with their own respective internal, 39  security problems and the R.G.M.P. with security generally there was no committee or similar body qualified to deal vdth security in all its aspects. At the suggestion of Colonel Murray D.M.I. a sub-committee of the Censorship Committee was then set up to consider this question and if thought' advisable to prepare a memorandum recommending the formation of an appropriate body. The sub-committee consisted of Mr. T. Stone  Under-Secretary with the Department of External Affairs Lt.-Commander Little D.N.I. Inspector Perlson R.C.M.P. Colonel Murray and Group- Captain Stewart. The memorandum was accordingly presented to the next meeting' of the main committee which put forward the following points and recommendations. At present in Canada it was pointed out each of the Departments of National Defence is responsible for security only in relation to its forces and installations. The R.C.M.P. is responsible for police activities throughout the country and the Port Security Service under its direction is charge with the taking of special precautions necessary at seaports and airports. The Department of Immigration is responsible for controlling the admission of persons to Canada the Department of Customs for the inflow of goods and to some extent for their out-flow the Wartime Information Board for the dissemination of warnings against indiscreet talk the Department of National Yiar Services for preventing the escape V to the enemy of useful information either in printed publications or by mail cable radio or films and the Department of Transport for the suppression of illicit transmitting stations. In general however no authority has so far concerned itself generally with the movement out of North America of travellers or with the carriage of documents abroad except to the United States to which their carriage since the United States became a belligerent is probably to be regarded as immaterial from the security ppint of view. The members of the Censorship Advisory Committee were all of the opinion that each of the agencies mentioned should be appropriately informed of the activities of each of the others and provision made for the prompt taking by all agencies concerned of any action which circumstances, make it advisable to take from time to time.  The Committee strongly recommended the setting up of a Security Board with broad co-ordinating functions similar to those of the United Kingdom Security Executive.  It suggested   a that the Security Board should be responsible to the Prime Minister  b that the Board should consist of a Chairman and four members of whom two should be free from departmental responsibilitiesj  c that either the Chairman or one of the members of the Board should be the direct representative of the Prime Minister thereon  d that the Board should have power to request the attendance of representatives of other branches and agencies  e that it should be the duty of the Board to onsider and make recommendations to the department concerned for the taking of such action as seems advisable to ensure that all measures required for the internal security of the country are duly taken by the a propriate authority  f that the Board should report its recommendations to the Prime Minister and further report whether action and if any what action has been taken thereon  g that provision should be made for the appointment of a secretary of the Board who would be free to devote his whole time to its activities and should be given such clerical assistance as is necessary for this purpose. These proposals have now been earefully examined by the various  interested authorities in Canada and are on the point of being adopted.   b Newfoundland. In May 1942 Colonel Stratton and Sir Connop Guthrie visited Newfoundland where it appeared that the conception of security control was very imperfectly understood. Appropriate measures to make the control effective and in particular to prevent leakages of information were as a result put into operation in that Colony and they included the appointment of a Defence Security Officer with the necessary staff to implement these arrangements. This officer Lt.-Colonel J. R. E. Guild is directly responsible to the Director-General of Security Services. Colonel Guild has recently put forward a plan to D.G.S.S. with the object of co-ordinating security and intelligence in the Newfoundland, area and linking it effectively with Security Co-ordination New York. Briefly hie plan is as follows   i D.S.O. Newfoundland to act as intelligence co-ordinating officer for the area covered by Newfoundland Labrador the Maritime Provinces of Canada and Greenland as representative of Director of Security Co-ordination as well as D.G.S.S. in much the same way as Colonel Stratton has already done in the Caribbean area  ii D.S.O. Newfoundland 1s responsibility to be extended to include liaison with Canadian authorities in order to supplement the existing arrangements and to promote improved security in Eastern Canada especially as regards port control. From the security point of view Newfoundland is so closely linked with anada that to all intents and purposes their interest in this respect are identical. The defence of Newfoundland is carried out by the Canadian Navy and the Canadian Air Force while in the matter of shipping passing through St. Johns to and from the eastern seaboard of Canada the Newfoundland Government is greatly dependent upon Canadian security arrangements in the eastern ports. The implementing of Colonel Guild's proposals will bring him in to much closer touch both with the Canadian security authorities and Security Co-ordination New York and it ought to provide this officer with available opportunity to make regular and valuable contributions to the newly proposed Canadian Security Executive which is bound to have the security of this area very much at heart.  3. Co-ordination of Security Measures and Intelligence. The independent establishment of various Security Service  M.I.5 representatives in the Western Hemisphere which took place in the latter part of 19A1 and in the first half of 1942 did not expressly provide for the co-ordination of the intelligence product of their activities at any focal point of the Western Hemisphere especially in view of the fact that in theory they were left free to consult with Security Co-ordination on matters of common interest. In practice however communications between the Defence Security Officers and Security Co-ordination were hindered by the absence of any arrangements for direct intercourse between them. These communications had to take place through, the intermediary of the local M.I.6 representative or through some other channel. At the same time very considerable interest was being taken by the Americans in security .matters affecting the Caribbean area thus pointing to the desirability of there being speedy and direct communication between the M.I.5 representatives and Security Co-ordination as well as to the need for the Security Service to be represented at a point which was already the co-ordinating centre for American and other British intelligence and security agencies.  Consequently in October 1942 Mr. Stephenson was appointed representative of the Security Service in the western hemisphere. In the words of the circular telegram' ' in which the Colonial Governors in this area were advised of this development this appointment has been made desirable among other reasons by the greatly increased importance of security measures in the Caribbean and West Indian waters and in territory situated in these waters by the expansion of organization of the Allied services charged with this task and by the practical and political necessity of co-ordinating Anglo-American activities in a zone where although the U.S. Government are primarily responsible for defence British colonies have an important and independent part to play in security matters. In this way Security Co-ordination became the natural link between the Colonial Governors and the U.S. security authorities and it became the Director s duty to represent the point of view of each authority to the other and in particular to defend the Colonial authorities against any charge on the part of the Americans that they were not playing their full part in enforcing adequate security measures in the areas under their jurisdiction. At the same time Colonel Stratton continued to be responsible for the supervision and maintenance of the security machinery in each place.  This new arrangement made it necessary for the following matters which had previously been the subject of correspondence between Security Co-ordination and M.I.6 and the Security Executive who passed  f  them on to M.I 5 would in future be referred direct by Security Co   1 Dated October 30 1942., 43. ordination to Security Service Headquarters 1. I'he vetting of Allied volunteers applicants for confidential employment in the Western Hemisphere. 2. Departed seamen throughout the Western Hemisphere. Lists of suspected seamen throughout the Western Hemisphere. 3. Suspect individuals firms and activities in the United States. 4. Sabotage and accidents in the United States. Direct correspondence between the two organizations on these subjects began early in January 1943 and during the first month of its operation Security Co-ordination provided the Security Service with approximately 150 written reports by bag and 75 telegraphic reports on matters falling within the above categories. During the same period approximately 90 written reports and telegrams were sent to the various Defence Security Officers in the Western Hemisphere either on security matters which it is felt would be of interest to their Colonial Governors or else in answer to queries which they themselves had raised. Hitherto the Director of Security Co-ordination has been chiefly concerned with the intelligence obtained by Security Service representatives in this area in the courseof their duties and it has been his endeavour to co-relate this intelligence with that obtained from other British sources in this hemisphere. The maintenance of adequate security measures has been left to Colonel Stratton and to the Defence Security Officers themselves although they have naturally consulted Director of Security Co-ordination when new measures are under consideration e.g. the scheme for the control of schooner traffic in the Caribbean area which is now operating in conjunction with the Americans. At the same time the Americans are displaying a natural and ever growing interest in general security arrangements in force in this area. In particular there is a tendency on the part of the U.S. intelligenceoffleers stationed in the Caribbean colonies to complain of the inadequacy of local security measures. While this complaint can undoubtedly be substantiated in a number of instances there is no doubt that the deficiencies where they exist are due to the shortage of the necessary staff as well as to a natural reluctance on the part of the Colonial Governors concerned to, 44. spend money on security projects rather than to any inefficiency or lack of energy on the part of any D.S.O.'-s in the area who have been dis charging their duties in their present posts efficiently and thoroughly while subject to the limitations necessarily imposed upon them by local conditions. It is doubtful however whether complete defence security can be achieved In the British possessions in this area until the principles of the unified control and imperial financial responsibility are adopted by the Colonial Office and other interested services at home. A useful start has been made with the transfer of the Terminal Censorships in the Caribbean Colonies to the Imperial Postal and Telegraph Censorship Department. However as this department has made it clear the administration of these terminal censorships and the inherent control of communications cannot be effective without similarly adequate control exercised by Customs Immigration Police and Security Services in the Colonies concerned. i, IV. PREVENTION OF CONTRABAND TRAFFIC IN SOUTH AMERICA. Ysith the setting up of the Consular Security Organization in South America it was natural that information should reach the C.S.O.'s from time to time on contraband and smuggling activities in that area. In most cases Spanish vessels were involved. In many of them the C.S.0. s were able to prevail upon the local authorities to institute special searches of these vessels in the ports of loading with resultant valuable discoveries. The increase in contraband traffic particularly in the shape of small bulk commodities during the spring and summer of 1942 raised the question as to whether C.S.O. s should announce these activities to the local authorities or withhold action until the appropriate Economic Warfare authorities both British and American in Washington and London had been consulted. Meanwhile the U.S. Authorities had begun to show signs of dissatisfaction with British controls. This feeling was to a certain extent shared by H.E.W. Washington who in November 1942 called the attention of M.E.W. London to a number of flagrant cases of evasion at the same time urging that the measures taken by their War Trade Control Officers Maritime Consuls in South American ports to be tightened up. These cases fell into two categories  a Shipping of excessive stores such as soap food clothing alleged to be resold for civilian use in the Canaries and metropolitan Spain.  b Smuggling of valuable forbidden articles such as platinum diamonds drugs etc. sometimes in conjunction with the above e.g. hidden in cakes of soap. It was agreed with M.E.W. Washington that these two categories constituted two separate problems and should be so regarded. Among cases of excessive stores cited by M.E.W. Washington from reports by the U.S. and British Consuls at Tenerife were those of the  Monte Negro and Monte Nuria said to have landed 60 and 40 tons of foodstuffs respectively there during October 1942. These stores were in part sold to the public and in part re-exported from Tenerife to Spain. A check in Buenos Aires gave the Monte Negro 114 tons of lentils for Tenerife and 18 tons of stores including 8 tons of, IS  lubricating oil 1-g tons of linseed and fish oils and miscellaneous foodstuffs. The Monte Nuria was recorded as having taken 100 tons of maize 110 bulls and 25 tons of stores including 9 tons of soap and 5 tons of bacon and ham for Tenerife. Later in November the Monte Saja was said to have unloaded 12 tons of fancy foodstuffs 8 tons of soap and 7 500 tins of salted meats in the island all unnavicerted.  Cases of true smuggling were those of important papers by the Count de Bailen of diamonds on the Cabo de Buena Esperanza and of  Graf Spee escapees on the Monte Teide . The discovery of drugs and caffeine secreted in soap when the Monte Gurugu was searched at Gibraltar in October 1942 suggests that the stores mentioned above may also possibly have covered valuable contraband. These cases had rendered the U.S. Naval Authorities extremely anxious tobring more neutral ships into control bases for rigorous search even at the risk of 'incidents .  On December 13 following strong representations from M.E.W. Washington M.E.W. London authorized instructions to H.M. Consul-General at Buenos Aires that he should not issue navicerts to ships of an offending line without being fully satisfied that the regulations were being observed. Unreasonable stores were to be unloaded a close watch kept for stowaways and each Master was to examine his crew's Quarters for contraband preferady accompanied by a member of the Consulate. Complementary instructions were sent to Madrid to obtain information concerning cases of evasion at the discharge end.  On December 23 H.M. Consul-General Buenos Aires was able to report that he had personally conveyed the strongest warning to the heads of the steamship agency and the Spanish Masters then in port. Other active steps were taken. A report that a trunk containing soap and foodstuffs had been smuggled on the Monte Sollube in December was immediately investigated and the trunk found to contain only personal effects. Before the Monte Negro sailed from Buenos Aires on January 1 1943j a Consular Officer and C.S.O. jointly supervised the unloading of 1100 out of 3100 litres of engine oil when it was found that the excess was claimed for a coasting voyage round Spain. In both cases the Master was made keenly aware of the serious nature of the Navicert documents to, 47  be signed.  The roblem remained of integrating our infom&tiws on this side fend making arrmginm%B fo tin.-luiekeet possible aetion on it. Tills chiefly involved a satisfactory liaison bfi t .een Security 1.virion aid M.K.W. and between C.S.O. a and local Consulr officials. As & first step Security Mvlsion circulr ised C.s.O. s on December 2 about the existence ftheM.E.W. list fseamen uspectedofcontribtndssuggling and followed tfcio up aitta the 1st itself m December 1 1942. The reeoKsrendations - de by E.E.W. Washington to M.I-.S. London on Dececsber 26 in agreement ith security Co-ordination wer. v. folio st   a 411 evidence of blockade evasion .twined by Security Officers except from secret source to be -assed t once to th -appropriate Consult r Officer snd to the War Trade Dt. ..rtrent of thi iK.b-i.soy or Con-.'uL.-jte concerned.  b Evidence of evaeion from secret ounces to be reported ay iRost iOTcdiate telegrar to S cu.-ity Co-rdinatioa Sew Tort and by them to London for concerting action -itb appropriate departments.  c Xelegrc-.rs to be sent to all karitlfct Consuls in Latin AEieriea urging thes tr c srat rloseiy 0 nmlKr. Security Officers nd both British nd 0.1. Haval Inteliigence and to obtain inatruetioas from li.L.b. lashiagton'before granting navicerts in doubtful cases. As the delay is involved in obtaining a decision from London under   b above It tight can that the ship had already sailed. Intelligence Division of Security Co-ordination in practice gives an interim decision wherever possible which is designed to h Id up the-issue of the .-avieort until final instruct ons from Lon on are f rt'ccming. The moot fruitful method f discovering contraband is from infor-ation obtainable on the waterfronts from tbipe chandlers stevedores and oth rs through C.S.O. s contacts. Conse. uerstly the C. s have now been authorized to s end reasonable ttsra for this information. In ffimTT 1943'these reca Mfations were accepted by M.E.N. Lmdon who proceeded to issue the requisite instructions to War Trade Officers in the British Missions in Latin America. They for the.basis for the .resent joint campaign against contraband traffic which It is hoped will improve co-ordination and accelerate the handling of th vest inforrrat.cn on attempts t smuggling and .'ill also result in the -'iv rcion, us  of & nueber of neutral vessels about hich oonclusive evidence is available to suitable control points for exasdnution.  As a contr.band control station Trinidad has alrays had lisiited usefulness v-dn to its distance off the trade routes and in addition it has beat the subject of objections on the gr isnds of security by the U.S. Authorities. The use of Datiar in test Africa has beers under consider-tion and although it suld involve a certain amount of joint control ..1th the French it is id lly situated geographically since it old enable north bound vessels to b examined befor they reached the Atlantic islands.  \  efforts to obtain the collaber&ticm of the U.S. office of g&val Intelligence has also been successful This office has now instructed ail its officers in S uth American ports to collaborate with G.S.O's in securing efficient contraband control  Tire joint Anglo-American collaboretion hieh this arrangement involves is mat sttisf&etory and it is felt that it will contribute in great measure towards the filling of th-gaps of the Allied block-id system in trn ocuth Atlantic, REPORT  C  BRITISH SECURITY CO-ORDINATION  IN  THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA  C PART III  SPECIAL OPERATIONS   S.0.E., Z&s&M X Origin end Fairly L'-ev XepMat 1 1. ft-ginning..... 2. Hrni 3. KinorHls .... 4. Pressjur Propaganda . 5. Par a t. . . . 6. U9ciw tjt ry rfar .. ....  7 Colonel s'iiliw 4. Offitiovai XX Later Levrloprtint 19U.-1942 1. Briviah and Oversee -tures. 2. Sabaeouersi r.xranaian... 3. training School............... 4. Freaent Position.............. 111. Liaison with United State Authorities 1. Co-ordin tor oi Inferostien.  i Special Operations Section .  ii hesa&refe and Analysis.  iii 2. Office of . trategic Services..........  i Joint thiefs of Staff.........  li S.C.b. Illssion to 0.1.4.......  iii  iv Training....  v Qlreetive ...  vi O jlies..... IV. Political Viarfare 1. Europe. Africa and the Middle liast .  i foiin .....  ii Sroodea -ting  iiijPressure Propaganda ..  iv Verbal Propaganda. .... .  t IxpsHsaiOB  vi conciuaiai............................ 2. FarEast........  i Beginning ..........  li Policy..............  ill Propaganda Qtantud......  iv 0p rations......  a Article on OenasB fifth Ccl n Activities tr J pan .............  U S. Broadcast to Far .East .  c Special Mma Service frox  -in.- . . ore..  d M t rial introdtieed into JepiJi...  e Miscellaneous Act vitlcB.........  v Concluslcn............................ V lunctiona and Orgaaiaaticc. 1. General Orgemic feloft. 2. Latin ri..si..  i Develop'-.ent.  li Op-r tlcn. 1941-1942.  iii Op ration 1942-4943 ...   1 Rio Conference...................  2 Charter of S.O. .................  3/ Security Setter..... 49 F F lo'5 'รยงl5vSiSv S  w vS m .o o vk v. e-os,  4 Anti-Axis Hoasjurss.. A Coioibife.... 3.Chile. C -rs-ail. D. Icuedsr  . P m F Caoiral G. H. Sellviai I. Qraguay. . a. . . . .  J. Ar mtin ... K. Vweeuel . .. 3. Minorities .......  i General......  it Groups....  a Italians............................  h rren  c Hungarians  d Ukrainians.....  e Turned ivs....  f Crorhc ovaks....  Poles..........................  h -ulsariar.s.....  i ............  j Greeks.....  it Lithuanians......  1 FInns..  ki Scmdinavian  n Spanish.  o Austrians. ip GemsDjr. ...  o vuasians...  llijLatln i-serica......  iv Labour....  v Iris Aserirans.......  vl Cevelopamta.  vii Futur Possibilities.... 4. XatellijeRS anc Planning. .. 5. iiecruitinf .. 6. Training.....  . Oocwiontars' rVarf&re. .. .. 8. Finance Supplies and ilecords.................. 9 ' aaMdi 'toti OiTitie.... ....  li 50 50 53 55 57 60 63 64 65 65 65 67 69 \ 69 71v 71 72 73 75 %  75 76 77 77 77 79 79 79 79 80 80  2 ea 62 G3 63 SB 90 92 95 96 97, 1 0RIGX8 Ai40 UMX SiV LOPHBSTS.  1. Prior to December 1940 there exist ' no 3.0. organisotitm s sash in th.. Americas. There wore two &g. nie in the United States who had b n am% h. . -.sob sont.'-s p.revloaaly .with gmertu. inKtmet .'R to endeavoar  to itylment b oric oa h ch th B rga ls 4iaa had be u n. id in fcurope. There woe also a r aent tiv of the Sritanove Sews Agency hose duties  sere to relay Anaricsn news to the e..rl- ue branehee of th . la Jugoslavia Hun.ssry Portugal as ell t the head office in London. Aa rt froo th persenal reiationshipt-established by G with such persons  as r. J. Edgar Soever .aid Colonel Aiiliar J. Donovan no organised stteiEpt h d been possible either to harness the t nti-i strength of the U.S  or to iiifluance a try of the U.S. into the war.  In Sesenbor 1940 G visited Lend and at th -request cf CD agreed to assure control of all 8 0. activities in the lu-etcm Herdophere This tfVMIpMHMb received the approval of the h ad of the C rg&niaction and eomismieation were t up to run aoeoriingly. 8o provision for staff was stade at t is ti e an. ' it'was-left to G fce explore ids way and M0M wh &t v r rcoorRendat ns to London that t saw fit.  The urlgiaal objectives a agreed h t een C C0 were as follows   a To obtain contacts with all the v.rieit greuj-.s of dissatisfied European refugees in the U.S.A.  b To obtain contact with nerey subject or the subjects of meey coupled countries wr.o eith r for gain or for patriotic e tivee would b repar-d to ndesv ur to re enter their respcetlvv countries for whatever pur oses way e con ae -ed necessary on behalf cf Great Britian.  o To arrange lines - ecr-munic&tion fid the U.S.A. into eneray c-untries in Europe aad/or into eneay occupied countries in Europe, 2  2. ' In January 1941 Colonel C. 6. Vickers visitsri iew York and  after discussions with 0 the framework of .a S 0. orgimis tion was laid  out Gappointed clefofth orguaigaticai 0 100 withm-assist..nt   0 101 .  The f llowing rlaeipal directives were then agreed  1. To & point an i.O. represent tiv in each of the Latin Acscrlccii H publics with a view to establishing .n S.O organisation to cc-v-r Latin America 2 To recr jtit in the Aacricas citiaens of eaeiqr or enemy oscupded countries sho would return to their countries of origin to contact already existing .subversive elements and to fors-new subversive cells  3. To t ke any warrantable action likely to influence the entry of the O.S into the war m t to discredit the ene iea of the Allies In the U.S 4. To ase contact with all the various groups f dir-satisfied luropean refugees and free nasvwtamta in th. U.S.A 5. To arrange lines si coutauieation from the-lestorn Hemisphere .into energy sad eriosy-eccupied countries. In view of the large territory to be covered the newly-formed 0 organisation remained in the erbryonie stage รยงm the first -is onths of its existence although a considerable number of operations were carried out mainly in the 0 S field and in th field of recruits. As regards 1 uth a. erica S.O. representatives of th following territories had visited Sew Xork by June 1941 and had had their appointemls conflmedt Venezuela North Brasil S \ith Brasil Trinidad Cuba Coltrabia Peru., 3. 3  In the U.S. contact was established with sersral minority groups and the erctetion of organiaatiens aag these was began.  The first of these was Austria Action which was an ambitious. If somewhat wverMSptla&stie attempt to unite all . ntl-4U&i Austrians. In spite of the constant bickering between th various gr ups however this rojeet r ntlex ct pionterinj service insofar as it was the first asia rity organisation to receivo benevolent recoptition from the U.S Department of Justice which at that time was Keeping a watchful eye upon till foreign Mineritiss in the U.S.  Among the Jugoslavs progress was t&td by the establishment .of & Slav Bulletin which created a centre for anti-B si ctivitiee among the Serbs Croats .n i Slovenes in the U.S.A. Courses of lectures by democratic J lav leaders were arranged and various vigilante groups ere established to Keep a watch mNasi agents ssony th Croats and Slovaks.  A close contact w s also established with the main democratic group eaottg the Ukrainians. This group kn wn as Defence of the Ukr in was composed of ole recognised Uvadera he Ukrainian democrats the social revolutionist and the fcrklng Mens Group.  S.O. trod warily among the Hwig&rims firing its first six woaths end established eecst ct for obs rva .ion pur.oses only with those who it.3 the entree Into the Hungarian Comunist Party Contact was also established with the onti-Sisai elements among the รขโยฌ . rpr.tho-itussiwn clergy vdiich was f.-und useful in counteracting the propaganda of pro-Kasl Hun Rrians. Greater progress was made mm the Arabs this was at the time when a British cru-ade to liberate Syria was considered issrinent . The principal Aasrioan Arab newspaper A1 Hoda was persuaded to become entirely pro-British. A He&r iast Infomatiars Bureau w s established in Mew fork and broadcasts over WRUL were subsidised in all the principal Hear Eastern langui gee., 4 Aamg feh ItaJLiansy a oiose co opor'.tion a at bil hea ith th Uazsdai Society and contacts ware mde through th-wrioue labour orgsriiaations with young Italian socialists in a attempt to persuade them into more actire anti- aai policy. 4 Pressure gXjlBMNMto As regards aubrersivi. propaganda in the 0 6 itself there fes no dearth oaaibilities. On the contrary the field ees so vast that it wae difficult t Know here to start A beginning at any rate was made -n a fairly dde front toeray agents ere of urse the main tirest . ay ns inst-ncca uy the ease of Dr. Kurt fiieth which i dealt with eisewhart in this report On the n&tivi Ameriesui front a variety o f org&Ri tions was established ranging from the vehen-eat Uon-Sectaris-n vnti-B&si League to the comparatively lofty Committee for Ister-Arserleaa Co-operation1 fhr-.'Ugh these attaoke were .'.ode on the isol-tienists and oativt anti- British ropagandists. Beenwhile on hat was then 3.0. 1 work a wide variety of broadcasts in some 15 languages was orgahiaed and .an extensive systea for sending rumours back into Europe w-s set up. 5. In the first rix months' r .C its existence the & organisation acquired an .dditionil function in fulfillin. the reQuircoents of the ' Far Eastern Branch of 3 0 &t Singapore. Publication ms arranged in the C.3 press ' f s itablc news stories articles and cartoons .and itea.s by radio eonnmtators. Broad casts both for internal and foreign con.sumption wer rganised A special daily news service to -usd. from oiagapora was set leaflets and pamphlets were 'inted und distributed In Ba .arses meng the Japanese caonnitles In the U.S. The sera operations were repeated in South America so that . kind .f snowball effect was achieved., 5  The operations of the Par Western Section -re given eof r tely in the special report of the Section but unci ubtedly the ao t Important of these m&t the series f Spinks articles on the Gertr-on Fifth Coluim in Japan . These ore published in a Hew York paper and \er-ubse.neatly trsaslatsd into S w . jaish .nd Portuguese for istJ-ihution throughout South America  6 Soew . nt rv y l he awhile it ha already been is ms th&t in th-rc&la of dowssmtary warfars certain 9j eoi lis d activities were essential and as -rt of a general letter-writing can ign proposals were sent hone in July 1941 for the creation f dt-.tion it a station consisting of speeialists in the art f nufaoturing documents. Permission to set up thl. station was received the following month. 7. Goipncl Ion v n. At this stag-Colonel Donovan who had been for ay months in cios touch ith 0 r-'Cc-iv-d h s -ir---etivt frosi the President to set up an organisation to deal with all forms of secret activities in the shape of SIS SOI r.d PHI. At th end of June 1941 a meeting took .l .ce at which Colonel Donovan exp undea ideas to the various section h-ads ..f the G organisation who in tarn ut forward their om suggestions. Lines of liaison .nn co-operation were quickly laid down.  Mth this the initial period of aev lopaent my he said to hay terwinaied and in July 1941 G returned to London for discussions on future activities., 6 ii. utk mr. 'jjpmi ss i9u-i9 2. 1. British Qvors fne discussion b twe a C nd CD in London aaring G s second visit in July 1941 were based on thv justifiable assumption that X K work in the Ajr.er3.cas vus bound to develop very exten Ively. In addition to the youthful but ra i- ly- gro dng organiz&ticm of Colon 1 Donovan v.ith its tuny preblcne of liaison an aabitioa pregraswe war. planned for Latin America requiring & great increase both In th. nunbtr of field agents and in the headquarters staff. Furti erqorit vs j agreed that a wide ex nison oult bt de-in the realm of Pvl activities or S.O. i as they then were. The o t immediate arobleis had been that of cov .r for th . -rowing orgaiiisstioo. after a seried of discussion dth the British Embacsy .it was mutually agreed to fom a. concent with the natue of British and Overs as Feetures . The overt function of this body was to distribute news and articles from the U.S.A. press to news apers . i then publications In Latin America and to rec .iv-from Latin America sitedA r stories and articles for distribution threugbout the British Aspire Accordingly office space was t en for the new acme to whose nace was registered by the Embassy i.th the Btate Dep rt .ent. At the same tie G. 100 was registered as Director. This arr. igeoent was effected in Lay 1941 Throughout the susaer m& autum of 1941 British and Overseas Features provided cover for the G crqanination and Iso discharged its evert functlewis. Unfortunately there was danger that the Ministry of Information under whose jurlsdictxon th. British and Overseas Features nominally ca s as & news agency might b seriously compromisoci if sub versive activities were traced te it. This difficulty eventually led to the liquidation of British and Overseas Features towards the end of November. It was f und ossibl however to embody th staff and office, 7   rrangeii-ents in the ti tistieal bra ch of the directorate of Security  Goordia&tion fhich h. a - inee that date provided cover for the G organlsetien  2. Subs wat FroE August 1941 ammrd the activities of the G organization were expanded greatly in til sections. directives for work were clarified by very helpful visit which AD/Z paid to Mew fork in Septesbw. The sect continuing expansion ms ssade in the Latin Arariean and the Minorities cti ms. A great increase of work of course took place in the W1 branch i s. GP and Far Eastern Sections but . these -'ere primarily concerned ith psychological warfare in .-.11 its forms they fluctuated greatly according to th Ituatlon of the E. cnt In the Minorities beetion lines were epr ad out among all the minority groups in the U.5. In Latin Amerie expansion and training were undertaken -Isultaneously. In June 1941 six chief agents were operating in Latin Ar erica except for Guaterala Paraguay and the Guian&s with the tearporary exception of Bolivia where the chief /.gent has .roved unsatisfactory and is being replaced. 3. Tralain.g School. The training school in Canada was opened for its first batch of students in Leoenfeer 1941. Since that time it has trained perswmel of Q a Head Office and also all the chief agents in Latin A.. ic with one exception in addition to a stream of key officials fras Colonel Laaovan's organization sad the Federal Bur au of Inv sti-ation. Its future prograrwe indicates that it ha an v n greater role to play with the Canadian as well as the 4 Msrican authorities for tt former s-r new v -ry anxious to e ai to the school certain people - has they foresee using as port of their large rganisatlen comparable to the auxiliary units in England In addition to this the school has aroused th interest of the Psychological Warfare drenen of tte U.S Chiefs of Staff .tv1 the first, g  students trou thi rgaatwitlon are going thr.ugh their training t the  time of wiling  The sohool h&s fulfilled wefulnes r ich canRot be onderoetim& ted in creating and developing friendly feeling towards Britain by those krmriemx -rganinations which have made use of it. In . art of course this is due to the fact that people going to the turn place for the mme course of instruction tend to dev lop a conaaon idee end so to be welded together dot credit Is due t the personalities of the instructors who made a very deep imnression on the American students by their thoroughness sincerity and exyerierxe. The American students who went to the school with a certain feeling of scepticism returned from it full of enthusiastic admiration for the ui and ideals of SOI and through this for the -hole British War Effort 4. Premki-Sgiy Sj. At the present time the G organisation is carrying n an extensive liaison 1th all the American organisation Ante -ested in S.O. mrk nd in psychological waffare. It h&s been instrument-... in persuading at least one of these The Foreign Information Services to arry out secret operations In the li.S against the Fifth Qolwm Propagandists on an imprealive scale. It Isas the nucleus of a ound organisation in South A-.erica. It raint ins close contact with all minorities and Free Movements in the O.S. md -ith its merican friends it is engaged in recruiting for all forms of SOI work in Europe the Middle East and the Pfar last, 9. Ill UAISG '1TH UUXtiXJ OTEDilflES i .X   1 . &2. ar.i UaL'S Uaison tth the office of Colonel B'tlliiUi. J. Canovan U.&. C ordlnator ' info-ts tion C.u.l. oewmccl aa ..ooc . hie office was opened for oau ttee of courte there had bean a 1 - -raonal raiationship bet en G and Colonel Doncran ahlch gre&tly facilitaU'4 t i s official liaiaen. During the auasa-.r oj autuBsi of 1941 liaiaoa &a oonr.icfced between the officers coneemad in Uu G r --Rl atlon and Colonel Donovan in person. Ihen G s Var.mgton office m o oaed in October 1941 Colonel Donovan had no .0. noadauarters ergaoisatier. it ill. He had s.pointed Colonel Robert A. Selborg head this brnneh -and &a reiiasinary ColorislSoloorghadbe- rsent ..-vcrtoLondontoviaitS.O.L.inorder  to study tuair Kvtr.oda of operation n o rir r-yatcis of training. Cclcmal dolborg returned to Washington in the aorly days f January I94 i having b -an very B uch ir rascad by -hat fee had eaer - d laamt and ready to -et up. a head u&rtere or.o .lizatic in '.-iahingtoo. Ha was hoaaver considerably haasptred by a. . r nt -reason f is inability to  [  secure a el-arnsUt dir-. Ctivt regtrding th-. sc- c of the 8.0. organisatiw which he wa . av a t d to organise. The G office did all it c-old to perauade hie ts go ahead and cr -ate a.-orgaoiaatlon s -aething on the linaa of whet ha had seen in London but for r-m reason h seeiaed 1 ath to do ao. Ihen it ove'ntu-.lly t ..-ok shape it wtt knoen as cpeoial Oper.-tisnr Section .0.S. Uaamihiia a nuiabtr f aotuai projecta wara suggested and steps were taken by Colonel S.4b rg to put t ess into operation. The roj eta were f r the penetration of the Aaorw an-5 th C& e V rde Islands . nd  . aticnw in S rth Africa. G enc urag si the --rejects .tnd gave assistnee by way of intro-iueiti --to Colo iel -'rg-niaaticn certain personalities with -etc h at...ff war ..oing t work rtieularly in the Azores and Gape rde island projects. As f r as M rth Afric. was eonc-med it was arranged that nieut.-Colonel W. A. 1 idy should proceed, 10to Tangier - a Killiary Attache both to act a an ebeerv r and to represent Colonel D a..van a S.O.S. and S.I.S. His original eharter w . -rinei dly to try e.nd atabiish awarounicationa between the various points in Uorth Africa atilisdag aa far as w&e feasible the State D - .-..irtrMdn obsf rvera o ware already established in this territory.  During this period for a r riety of raaaaaw little progress was   fade in - fttinf. the headquarters organl- atioa . dequately safe up. A start however we c de in the field of training. Celon-1 Garland H. feilliaB w&.. recruited to study the o-fition and to set up training schools. His reviout experience h d been in-th running of thr C.I.P.  Contra-lntrLligenow Police whose funci.ons in . & e-ti e war similar to feho of the ut limited to tbe Aray. At tb outset Colonel mxu&m had ifefelf i. e.. f exactly what S.C. training involved but after his vi it to fciic S.G.i.. training carp mCanada he b gan to show definite signs of understanding what was i squired C 1 jij1 Williama ia -an extremely active m& .'-nerg-tic officer an he in dl .toly got uey with locating sites fe .chools two of -. rich were secured in fxtre ely good paaitions. MaanwKila Solon. 1 Solberg wa-beaoedng rather rastiv so to his livability to get t w redea idatruetitma that aa r ..airai fot the further expaneiofi of the S.O.S. organisation He himself h d visited Worth Africa for U.5. Military Intelligence during t previous \uw er and knev a .good deal about this territory utd consequently wae specially Interested in opt-rations in f/.nt . rea. larly in February 1942 fat put up the suggestion to Colonel Don v.-ts that he himself should proceed to Lisbon to tidea personal c'.arge of the operations in Worth Africa and t- Iberian Peninsula and this -juggestian was aces..ted by Ms chief. This field was later restricted to Portugal and jin and Coionei faddy was placed in c -arge of Worth Africa It was arranged fa .t Colonel Preston Qoodiv.ilom should take ove executive h adship of S.O.S. after-Holonel Solborg s departure.  Colonel Goodf- llow 8 association with Colonel Don-v n had been a long-standing one .dree he bn. been the U.S. Miilt ry Intell ei.noe liaison wit . Goiom-i Donc-v r. s organisation fro the tirat it started, He ret-in-d fcM petition ia h Inart 8 d uties and raapaosibilitlf.-an I remained i ad f the liaison seeticn of the U b feilit rv Intt lli. -nee as well ae executive h &d -T S.O.S While this has asany uvantages from Colonel Don van s point view in giving hi access to th U.S. liiitnry Intelligence organisation and ths her fiepr.rtffient generally it necessarily restricted Colonel uoo fellow in th seope of his activities Isacsedi&tely after he look over. Colonel Goo-. fellow arranged for the secondin' of U S. War Department personnel to the Coordinator of Information for the. purpose of staffing his training establishtttents. After & cor. .ar-.ti rely short delay ht Obtained uthorlsatioo fro the AaoriMB Chiofs of Staff for the aeconuiny f about 0 officers and 150 other ranks for this specific purpose. Frws the training point of vifcw this was an isontdiat -dvaatag and nabled him to recruit uite a numbt-r c-f officers with -hich to get his training f-ing. C..ccial course were ruwn up nt the S.O.K training school in Canada for instructing a. nuaber tg Misti l cn. Mm c ursee varying in Length from fu.ll course of one noitth down to short eourse f ..vie eek. There its no doubt that the training given at this school -has been and ill . -f enormous benefit to the training side of Colonel Donovan 3 S.O.S. In the -.otanwhile a manbi-r of additional projects were suggested the principal of which were in Ch ns and in the kiddle bast. The China project was initiated by request fro General S iiweil t. the-War 8 p&rtsmt that a certain officer by the nu-e of Captsin Carl Sifler be trained nd sent out to aim .'or the purpose of assisting in organising guerilla groups in the Chinese theatr war. laBUtdie-ts stops wort-taken to get lifler back from Hawaii whers he was .osted .ni to collect around hi a .arty of suitable men f work in that field. While from the eint of view ef the Q organization lifier himself nd those he crsortally reeruited did not appear to be irticu.. irly suitable a --rgaaisers for S.O w rtc in view of iht fact that General otilwell had s. eeifleally asked for hi It was felt that this reject must be allowed to continue-aid rust be assisted in every possible way by the G organization., 12  With r.g r tothimiddleliast ColonelOtmcvan sAgreerent waa sMtur.d to any org-oia&tion that they r y h v In the Middle Bast being entirely operated 3 a J int undertaking with S.O.B. Middle Bast This arrangeMnt w&s irade o e uroe without prejudice to his S I S. which Colonel Doncmm wished to bt iade ar dt t -f nj B-itish service The conclusion 's arrangesent coincided ith the return f Mr. Frank K ur n frotn th Middle -st wh re he had been an obsenrer for the C-ordlnator of Information and he wa very short-y afterward a pointed as the CountrySction Head for the Middle fart. When Maur n was in Cairo h had been in touch ith certain of tin Yugoslav readers there and oar-c b-.CK very aueh imbued ith the necessity of assisting the Jugoslav guerrilla forces operating in Jugoslavia. He also came back with certain s ecific require ments for them. Although efforts were issde by G s staff to dissuade them Colonsil Donovan e S.Q.S went she d ith r ro . sai ch they -.ut up to the American Chiefs of btaff for providing certain of these urgent requirements including airplanes ilit r equipment r dio e'-uipment and Bicdica-L stores. After considerable del y the U.S Chiefs St ff advised that they serf qywp thetic with the reject but t s the Middle last wad a British theatre of war they f it th -hole project r ould handed over to and handled by the British. Subsequent i that -.lato considerable negotiations had gone on dth S.O.S reg .rding th-sending out full represent tivf from their rg niaatiun to at on th S.O.B. Board in Cairo and it -.a hoped that in th near future aben h ter.-.s of reference have been -greed upon a s itahl officer will be dec. itched. In the ms&nwMle Captain hobert Low has already been sent out to act to local 11 Ison officer pending the arrival of the full empowered representative. A further project in oh G wa consulted wa .. seibility of  per ting in Australia Colonel Donovan was in any event e ndin . out a cert in K- j r Jones to Austr 11 j on rojects in connection 5th n 3'Foreign Inforr-ation Cervices and it was suggested th t he -tight approach the Supreme Com' -.nder GenerU UaeArthur res' rding S.O.S work in that area. As a result however f com unieallon.- 1th Genem LecArthur it trer.s ired that he already had an organisation in being and old n t re-uir Colonel, 13  Conov&n t op rate in fch & field.  Later the at.ff f S.O.S. was strengthened by the addition of Lieut.-Cort'iainder .H Vanderbilt who h i-eviouBly been working the Coordinator's Mew York office.  Uurlrii the visit of MT it was amaigcd V t GT-3 should bo lent to thv Coordinator to ivi.se both S.O.S. and S.l.S. on the ...ubject f tr&ining in addition to Captain h E Fsirb.srti ho h & been fsorking as an inotruotoj o ' instructors f Colonel Oonr.-v- n f . e eeks. GT-3 took up his duties in the Washington office .u te recently but wa.-. required to return to Canada duo to the death f h\y relief there. During the short period he a ith the Coordinator of Inforraticm he ade a aeries of recoct .on-iationsforthe improvementoftheirtrainingay t %allof which have been accepted.  S.O.E. s close contact ith Colonel bonov.n's S.O.S. has already proved of great use to S.0.1. In one field via. WWof cturing .nd aupply of plastic end devices S.O.S. has been of articular assistance. S.O.S. launched into a ssanuf .cturing progi affine an . e msiderubl .--cale nd S.O.L. lent G.50600 and G.50601 to organiac t s rection of their work. Considerable progress has aiready been tn de ...ud it hoped that t reduction of PE will fee-going forward in the very near future in increasing uantitles.  S.O.S. has also gono a long way in st rtirtg the ranufucturing of S.G.E.'s standard toys 1 and devices.  ii flesearch . Palyalg. . T.y h i . riod of the recent developKcnt of Colonel Con van's S.O. and S.l.S. org&nis'-ations close liaison baa been maint ined ith tbs talon-1 himself ai.d ith the other branches f his work. Considerable .uantities c f . .teri&l of the background nature have beeti supplied to S.O.E. frees is ueeearch and analysis br rich and a close touch kept ith h C.l.S. staff ith h it the Vi/.rhington office are on sxtrer ely intisatf tenca., 14.  lii For Xm iRforeatloR '--orrlces Cclo-ifl ConoYfan s first ct on receiving h e directive from the President was thy aspeinteent of Ur. Iw-bsort i. Sherwood as Assistant Coordinator of Infort.. tion nd as head of the Foreign infonaaldsm Services F.I.S. . This orgHrdxstl m s created to carry out .. ropag/ nd& of oil fems exe t in the dorsstic field nd in Latin crioa. Mr. Shervood visited London in the w c-r jf 1941 and was received cordially by both SOL and Phi each of '.horn took him fully into their confidence. He returned t the U.8 fill-.a ith enthusiasm for olitical warfare in ill its forms and proceeded tv construct his organisation.  The v rious sections of the FIS were originally as followst   1 Planning and Policy eampriritv dares terburg 2 Wallace Deuel -Harold Guinsberg and Percy timer.  11 Badio hews k mt under m4 mao'tmc r .  Ill Middle East Section under   IV Central European Section  V French Section under Edmond  VI Publications Section under all printed propaganda leaflets pa pblets booklets pictures ute.  Vll Technical Sactlo un er hurry emstruetim of transmitterw.  fill Travel Section under Harold Guinsberg J &lt ..ith the reeru.. ting and deapatoh of FIS agmta to the field.  F8r any years so..- respondent of the Chicago Tribune in Europe. He is the author of Str-tegy of Terror the first detailed analysis of German political warfare.  2  Member  f the banking family -nd ha for-any years been int rested in  the organisation of tht v.rious ain.rities In the' U.S.  3 Formerly Berlin correspondent f the Chicago Daily Sews . He is one of America s leading experts on Ger any .And his recent book People under Hitler is one of the bast books on Maai Ger-any  4 President of the Viking Press Book Publishing Co  5 Boa correspondent of the Interc tianal Mews Service fron. 19 9 to 1941. Hie-aittpiKBti to PIS Ik Im fn where for s time he took ov r Hr bhitr.sy s funetions uu chief liaison officer for the C. of I b s fitted him admirably for his new work cm the FIS Planning Board, 15  The task of the 6 station tvem then on was not only to carry out political warfare but bo assist and build up the Foreign Infomatiem Cervices.  Governnantai ecntrol of such propagfuida facilities as the radio haa nev. r been fully established and the FIS f-unu thwslTO in difficulties fro the outset not only t-dth the v rio cun -roial companies but ith other U.S. Government Agencies. They thus had to rely very considerably upon the help of the G organisation .ad for many months SOI continued the secret subsidies to various radio broadcasts on behalf of the FIS during hieh time FIS were able to put their affairs in order.  It is ossiblo to sunsari.se the progress f FIS by such events  as the followings- Hov. 8 1941. Shortwave broadcasts to Europe start in Czech other in Swedish Finnish Italian later tec. 7 U.S. declares war on Ju an and later m Germmy and Italy. AH radio broadcasts trosi th -East and West Coasts handed over by SOI to FIS together with personnel. Jan. 6 1942 First U.S. leaflet dropped v r France. Jan. 31. BBC rebroadcaeta f American prograsmes start. Mar. 12. First FIS photograph telepbotoed from U.S to Australia via Montreal. kay 21 First U.S. picture radioed to Cairo. The ibov examples f course say b Mn' idered to be of a fairly overt nature but they involved const nt coasoltetiee ith the G organisation  training md d sp tch of men to th field which a undertaken on & wide  scale difficulties .ith uch U.S. authorities as the State Dep rtr e-nt which were only circumvented by th freedom ' ith hioh FIS were allowed to use .  T  Formerly reign eorreep idmt for th Now fork Herald Tribune in Paris  Berlin and Moscow.  An experienced journalist she fur cany years wa head f the photograph  department of the Associated Press.    As the Director of the ColoBbia Braodeaating System he has the necessary  influence among the various radio uanuf-iteturing coc.psnics and the neces ary  experience to fit him for hie post as head -f the t--ehnical side of the  radio organization., 16. S.O.E cables for c ruaunicatien ith PWE ex ertr In Britain access to Infor-ation which they e uld not obtain even fron their own serviees.  Liaison was effected in Washington her policy n decided and in See York where operational headquarters wer-established at 270' Madison Avenue. This liaison was carried out by the two G sections concerned with Political Warfare namely GP and GO 3. Functional liaison wa set ap in .such a way tn-t hen for esMipls the Publications Sections of FIS were receiving the-un ivided attewttion of one G officer ttve feudio Section ar-other and sc on while matters of policy and plaming were settled between Mr. Sherwood on the one hand and G 101 and G 500 on the other.  Latterly FIS showed an inter si in smuggling documents and propaganda devices 3f all kinds JLito uro e ind the G organization undertook to handle t la in Latin Amerie.. for them.  Co-operation between the G organization . d the FIS was complete in every respect. It was nev r r rred by my it.ute as to respectiv spheres of influence .nd operations. ..ch operation was regarded as a j int affair nd the SOI ob ectiv of h. maesing mi guidin . th tremendous pot'.otial oowe-of -..he U.S.A. was thus achieved in this field.  Representatives of FIS wer appointed vni despatched to various  .-.-.rts of the r. rid including Stockholm Berne Chungking Hew t'elhi Melbourne Cairo I inbul and rr&ssaville. Fxteasive co-operation  was also arr- Jged n behalf of SGI misei.on ct Accra under W 45.  Conrider&ble material was ordered through the FIS and was des tc ed  to various . .rt.' of this territory.   i Joint .Chiefs of -vUff. On June 1 tb 1942 the President as Commander-In-Chief ssigned n executive order transferring the-Office of Co-ordination of ini'or atioa exclusive of the foreign information services to the newly created Office of Strategic Services henceforth to be under the jurisdiction of the U.S. joint Chirfs-of-Staffe. f Colonel Bonovan wa appointed director of the nm organisation The  /, 17  beea.'.-'e f th new Of ic f Wap Information undor the direction of Mr isi r ifnrie the w 3Ll toom wrifcwp and broadcastor who reeelv d sweeping  owers tc ooordlnat1 competing infonaation tg ncies. In the S.O. field the Office of Strategic Services was under the dlrection of the J int D.S. Chiefs of Staff t' prepare plans for .nd to execute subversive activities .  At the eane time thi directive whilst assigning the direction and execution of subversive .-repaganda to the Office of War Information appointed % Joint Psychological Warfare Coaffidtteo to determine oliey Colenol ikmoym was appointed Chairman of the Cosnittee and it other rosssbere were de up of ropresentativee f the U.fi fighting services. Its duties v er-defined as foliOAfflj    a In conjunction f&th sub-vrdinate agmcles of the joint 0 S. Chiefs of Staff sad th Stat Deparfesent or other existing U.&. Sovernfficnt Ages eies to initiate fonsui.. te and develop plans for Psychologic-.1 Warfare.  b Under the direction of the joint U.fc. Chiefs of Staff to co-ordinate Psyahologloal Warfare activities f other U.S &cvern cntal Agmeita and to ealiaborsts /ith toterssted nations to the end that oil Psychologies warfare is in accord ith strategy approved by the Joint U.S. Chiefs of Staff.  c To designate the executive agencies for iatpisaenting approved Psychological Warfare plans.  d tv- -iwlt P yehologic&l Warfare plans to the J.C.S. through the joint staff planners. SlmiltaneGUSly orking subeosaaittee andmAdvisory Ccassittea were appointed ioh consisted -f representitivos f the Sfefite Departsrent  Board f Economic Warfare Coordinator of Xnter-Amerleaa affairs and the  Of .ic of fi&r Inforraation  The dirastlve did not clearly define the respective duties of the Office of Strategic Services in the Office of War Information in regard to  . ollticil. warfare. Accordingly negotiations between various U.S authorities  interested in th a subject continued thr ughout the surmer and autism and  it was not until the end of the year that the difficulties were finally  settled. On December 22nd 1942 a new directive was signed by th U.S.  Chiefs of Staff 1th iamediat effect. It abolished the Psychological  Warfare Committee and 1-seel all psychological warfare under th direction  of the O.S.S. &s an agency oi the joint Chiefs of staff leaving only th  actual planning And execution vf subversive propaganda to Mr. Elmer Davis s, ig Offioe of iar Inforaaticas. Tiie felIe iRr exirooi from th.'.e tiirtctive covered the con uefe of psychological warf r . funeiicnet  The Psyehoiogieal Warfare functions asci ied to the Of ie of Strategic Services vdll be conducts in strict accord with the following A The ilifcAry prvgrmm for Psychological Warfare is restricted to operations conducted in direct support of actual &t piatsned eilitury operations md includes the following   1 Propa- ' atda under tie Office of War Information  2  eonoadLe iarfar-. under t .-e Beard .f IconorAe Warfare  3 Special Operations under Office of Strategic Services.  a Sabotage.  b Espionage in entry-occupied controlled territory.  The organiMtion mi coudust of guerilla warfare  d Count r-espionage in on y-oeeupitni c-controlled territory.  e Contact ith undergrcunl groups in nery-c cupl .J or controlled territory.  f Contact .1th foreign national groups in the United States to aad the collection of essential infonaatioa for the execution of Pscbological Warfare operations in corinult&tinn with the State Dep&rt nt. 0. Fsychologisal Waffere op r tions rrc uppi .x.mt--ry to ond raust be coordinated ith sdliteiy operations. To cneure this & Pl&mlng Group to act as a joint eedium shall b . set up in the Office of Strategic Services for sup-.-rrising nd coordir.a'-.ing the planning and execution of the rliitrry jpogemm for PsyeholOfclcel Warfare. The Office of strategic Services Planning Group shall consist of  1 One aseaber appointed fey the State Department Two Hietsbisrs appointed by th Chief of Staff of the 0.8. Arsyt Two mcafeors appointed by the CoKmarider in Chief f the O.S Kavy Four ffioabors including the Chalrasan appointed by the Mrector 14 Office of Ctri-.tegic Services.  2 The fBCBtoers of th Office of wtrategic Services Flaming Croup shall fe AVaUUdsie for fuH-iiss duty and shall be free fr other assigned duties.  . to Advisory Cosaittee coneietiog of represent tlvun c 1 the. Board if conorsic Warfare the Office of War Information the Coordinator f inter-Araeric&n Affairs and the Treasury and from time to time represent live from such other Govcmswnt agencies as ray be called on to serve shall be set up to serve '.ifch hs Flsiwing Gi vUp ittst M Lu 'i vliaal - fibers or as Comittss wben required bj the Chairman f the Croup to consider miters affecting tht respective agencies represented on the Committee. The rcsbers of th Advlscry CoRtraittee will advise the Planning Comsdttee as to how their respective ay. ncies sai-. fee of assistance in ensuring the success of Psychological Warfare plane., 19   4 All f 3or project sr.-i plans fu Psj cholo -jie&l will t intfcgrsit d . ith siliUry aae n val progr-t.sm by the Of'ice of tr&t gic tryiaes Planning Group ft4 after approval by the Diroetor of the Office of Strategic Oerrittes sutosdttod to the Joint Chiefs of Staff thr u h the Joint Staff Planners for final approval C Unless otherwise eeifleelly authorised ersomel to . rovlded for guerilla aarf re will be Halted .o arg-itere fo .enters and operational nuclei of guerilla groups  B Within organised theatres or areas officers end agents f the Of ice of Strategic rvices Kill be under the direct control of the Coam&odsrs ooncemedy who i-ili be infore.ed of Si.1 plans and projects to be carried out within the theatre of area nnd their current status. They will not engage Jn tny activity not approved by tfe Cob aider owioerr.od  E Tne tiadUtg of Psychologic -1 Warfare eeaswrss initiated in the United States is subject t'.v direction of Security Control  At the seise time th j-int Ch efs Staff Agreed that G.S.S  shouldearryout suchS 0. antiVitineinit dy Sicily S.-rdinie C-rrica   nd Prance end elsewher us were required by th -Worth African theatre  ccfi. inder.   ii & V4 b KU . .9b w yaAiaU At the tine of Colonel Dcnov-m s visit to London in June 1942 1 suggested t t a .pointrnnt of asis ion - f -rts to assist his S 0 Section. The ilea &s thfot the edssion shcul b situated in Washington sith an office actusily in the O.S.S.  buiiuing. The Officers selected for this sdesic were in addition to CK 300 wluo w& i slr t. y liaison Officer In s ashing .ai BU190 31 390 and Gl- 110 The newly appointed stead S.0.E representative in the United States for GU was to be the tviffiinwl head f thi mission. The authorised sw aibers of the mission arrived in Washington inuring July and August OK 350 casing fror. Cwinghing vis London and the .-thcr two officers direct from London.  Much valuable worts wa ism by these ffleers whose knt--.-dg . however was In fact not fully utilised awin o the re-organisation of t c S.O. side of O.S.iS. referred to belosr in ewmeeticA with the-retirersat from in. i o t OolWRel Ocodfelloa The mission rerained at full strength until vewbtr 1942 when first GM.110 wui rccailr - to London ti.euGM.350anafinallyGi. 150inFebruary1943 ' ..chleftonlyGK.'joO to maintain liaison la many ways the -rk cf the mission w. v luable, 20 alihoagfe Its ounewtc r salta wars n-i -a trident -is sight have be i hoped   ill yofvt&n O.S.S. ha-r ro- ot in hand fcbt netting apofstlssioesinIonton SrtuAfrica. Cairo 'n Chin .aidlii-issssrlssloos in lest Africr. end Indis. Owing to the ncMn ry of the U Chief f Staff the netting up of these ndssion has b en consider.bly  delayed 0 S S heve boww ir got authorisation ao t . un Joint tis ions with 0 h is London nd Korth Afriea snd &r in process f getting authorisation fei the iswion in the Middle East the lieison i on la West Africa Is already established but is n-'t at all active. Their slsslatt in China is still as far as Is known ir its early stages though It Is undsrstood that amsiderable hegetiatlens have been mssirttni with the Chinese for eo-oper tin -Jtb the fai Li organisation in Chungking  . bsgotiatiene have been going cn through the Chinese fisteaay in Washington Whii eunside v.bl delays have been exp.-riesieed in Ui netting up sf these  various missions it I.-he -ed that in the n ar future uuit'.hi personnel will be available to snsble these nisaions aetively to tAr. a whtre in the work of an S.0 nature in eolleberation with S 0 and indspsnieistiy  the nly sis ion abroad which so f&r ha in feet carried m any aefciv was that h adsd by Celotel fcddy in Scrth Africa prior to the operations In that theatre. This oission working in elosr cellabor&tSoR with S 0 I aehieved eensiderabl results whioh tr well kaem and whiefe need not be described h re  Barly in July 1942 a proposal was put up h t Ccionel fi.%ro5d Hoskins would preseed t. the Middle l t m nlesioa to Sy 4s to investigate  . the possibilities ef Amerie partieipstien in S 0 perstiwis. in thst theatre Bl lse t stake a report to the State Separtoeat rep. ..rcii g the politic situation there. As a result cf thf. efforts .ade by the S.O.E Bdssion in 'W&sningtan in collaboration vlth the British Joint Staff Mission thescop &f ColonelHo - kins nissianwas Id- rallyreducedandthe dangerous features wash mrc at one tiae apparent nd which uare causing gri&t anxiety to H M 8, 21  and 1 1 -rtlcuiar to the Foreign Office were eliminated. Colonel Hoskins haa no returned enc h . idt- is report and a far . is known ueb rcocnmeudations as he has m&de are from th British point of view completely inn cuous. It seems unlikeljr that Colonel B '. inr-ill return i the Middle East and even if b-. d - s be will be conplattiy uu. rdin&te to the head of the O.S.S. adUaiett in Cairo which is at the mooent in process of being rotabiisbed.   iv fraiolni.'.. The training eeteblieteienta i O.S.S ahich were arigindly set up unde Colonel Lilia s were later aonplttcly reorg&wlsed. Previously the training e tabil b cnts were-divided between their SO and SI sections. As a result ecosemiiations of Mf/p this system was altered end combined training s-ct ons wert set up. Colonel 'Williams was treneferred to t Airborne Troops and the. r le of the treinin.- -as gut in tne hands of Dr. Aenncth eaeer. Me r aa set up -series of schools covering preiisd -.-.ry parachute eno finishing training and tnese are now working satisfactorily and roiucin good results. The bulk f tro training being given is to otenttal executive and field of leers -f Aneriean nationality. As yet little actual t aiming of agent for field . rk has been undertaken.   v birvetive. At the of July 1942 the than head f the 3 0 section of 0 3 S. ia the p.rson of Colonel Cooifellow was superseded by Lt. Colonel E.C. Hunting on. He had .revleusly be tin security officer for S.O. sad S.I. sections of O.S.S. He decided on his appointment completely to reorganise the hole S.O. branch. He discontinued all the existing recruiting -ctivities s-any of which from the British .joint f view had been extremely uruesirable mid started to recruit nm personnel for h s executive oaiiions. He was however condurably haaprred by the slowness of the 0 3 War Department in settling the 'ilitcry establishment for O.S.S. which became necessary when the 8.5. Chiefs of Staff instructed that as far as possible 0.3.3. era innel s juld be isilit.--rlsed. In September 1942 C Lonel Huntington aco ani d by Lt.-Cotiffibnder Potter visited London and n. d ext-n. ive convursatione with S.O.L. headquarters. While there he visited largn nur r of training n oper tion&l eotablishiBents of S.O.E. On his return he started to net up Me organisation .although, ti-ls pr s wa-r extremely slow.  As a result v ' the eds md r tanglings w leh aro-se .'tw th estJaiiahist at f the rid si in 8writ Afr-ea It was decided that he should again visit Lends and N rth Africa as sell tn Ceoentoer 1942. Its left behind s Ht depufcgr t Scmaander Halliweli. Colonel Huntington bee not yet returned and in hi abewree Gmsmnt&vr Hailiwell he been saving conaiderable progress in the setting up of their headquarters organisation in Washington  vi Suo lios. It originally been hoped that O.S.S. would be  bie to contribute to'S.O operations generally tv a large extent in the furnishing f suppling Uam h-wever ts e './.plication -hich arose ue . result of 0 &.S. being r.o-.de subordinate t the O.S Chiefs of Staff their .rogresne f aonufasturing has beeti seriously delayed m& ia fact is t under way yet in the late suEcaer certain contacts had already b-m placed for certain spueialisMl toys d devices. On October 7th 1942 O.S.S. wer instruct d that they were not until furth/r b ties to place any nm contrasts. However they were allowed te continue the .scisting ones. Up t the tine of writing t ialtjation has not been clarified although -am progress hss been -ade in th directico. It is hoped that before very long they will recur th necessary approval of the U.S r Chiefs -vj' Staff to set up the whole prcgraBese as originally envisaged although MM lly vto n t.-i.n is likely to be ia itffieuit to forecast, 23. iv  political waanm 1. &irom. AfrTCfe 'nd tha aidll a t.  i fcunuatlon. The section in the 0 organisetlon which ea orlglaally eoac .rn fJ with polities warrsra was known as the GP eestlon The history of the GP Section states fro March 1941 wnen it was decided to set up a special section to deal with FBTg functions SQ 1 a they were then eriled as distinct from the physical operations of 30.2. In its foundations in he G S. the SO orgcniMtlon eonsisted of two-people 0100 and 0101. By March 1841 0101 had boon placed in charge of the PS1 section. This was followed shortly afterwards by the sppointinant pf G6Q0 to control PWE activities in the Far Fact. Froas the outset it was felt the work of OP in the Tfeetera Heaiephoro was to implement the work of PSK itself not only by sending home all kinds of infomation of vsilue to PWE but nlro in organising political warfare from the Western Katai.-sphere to Europe in the fora of rumours letters . am hlotp proolasmtioae and broadeesta. It was also felt that this propa ganda 'Quid be all the more effective if it crme ostensibly as American propaganda. The obvious eonelualcn was that it would hove to be 'subsidised and organised nscretly. This was dene by the u e of a large rusher of Inter mediaries.  ii iroadcastiiig. Negotietiono were i ade titrough intersiedieries with FRUL the shortwave radio stetion in Boston which was than the moat powerful shortwave station is the U. . and the on-with the largest Kurepean listening audience. Broadcasts were organised as follows each group indicates a different intermediary  i French German and Serbo-Croatian to Europe  ii French ClBsa&eal Arabic Egyptian Arabic Turkish fUnmanisn Poreian lalaff and Pousses to Month Africa and fclia Middle East.  Ill Spanish and Portaguase to furop M''  iv Swodisfe  v Italian  vi Greek to, 24. At this stag it bacsase difficult for obvloua reasons of tisia to squeag further broadcasts to Europe on to the air or r WH0L and negotiations war now opened with a number of other stations in the O.S notably with WGEA and 0E0 the General Electric stations in Schenectady and with fLVO the Crosslay station in Cincinnsiti. By this time however the U.R. Administration had awakened to the fact that short-wave was a weapon of war and it began nepotiationo through various channels with all coaparies owning ahort-wfive radio stations.  iii P been organised satisfactorily it was felt that a iore Indirect fora of propaganda should be brought to bear. Other intermediaries were there fore contacted for the creation of various American organizations. One after another the following were either revivified or crested by the GP Section  i T  ii T  iii T  iv C  v C Each of thea had separate functions but in general their functions were a to attack the enemy ittrin i.e. the Isolationists appeasers pro-Germans pro-Italians and pro-Japsueae b to sponger proclamations and print propaganda to Burope. The Son-Sectarian Anti-He.si L a rue mm used principally in the most active field of attacking and labelling such isolationists as Lindbergh Wheeler and Wye. It produced a variety of p&aphleta many millions of which sore distributed throughout the 1J.S. Its most notable achievement w s the cirapaign concerning Lindbergh and his German decorations. The Councilfbr Democracy rind the League for Human Rights ware used on the higher plane principally as the organisers of pro-British anti-isolationist meetings. The Council for Democracy specialized on research mum the various, 25. Minorities in the U.S and survives to this day as a powerful organisa  tion although no longer with sueh intimate connections with S.O. The  principal achieveriert of the League for itoan Rights in the pamphlet field  was a leaflet entitled Their Aims -Our Aims which contrasted Allied  and Maai doctrine. Jore toan 8 000 000 of these ere printed and dis  tributed throughout the U.S.  Through the League for Human Rights an approach was made to the Aaerican Federation of Labour sine it was felt that not enough had been dose to win over the working masses to the support of Britain. At this stage It must ba remembered that Russia was still neutral and that ih eoarsmlsta were urging & violent campaign against us mainly through the CIO end the more radical aFL Union . However a contact aa ogtebliahed  .it.h Silliaa Green Head of the AFL and with his principal lleutsufent  Mstthew Soil and by aid-sum.ior the Cosmalttee for Amorican Labour to Aid British Labour had been established and had held severs mass meetings  The Committee for Intar-Assericsn Co-operation was founded when the GP Section began to l .unch into activities in South Meric hen it was felt that some other form of American sponsorship would have to be found. This organisation was principally concerned with transmitting into Spanish and Portuguese the various pamphlets which were produced by the other nAmorlean organizations. Thu - for example two illiori copies of Their Aims -Our Aims mre distributed in South Aaerlca 1 500 000 in Spanish and 500 CX0 in Portuguese. Similarly about 1 000 000 copies of 0500 8 pamphlet German Fifth Column .in Japan were also printed and distributed.  In all the above eager it must be aapfa&gised that at no time was the hand of Britain suspected in any of these operations. No British subject was on the committees of any of these organisations and no British subject was even used as an intermediary. To thi day the American authorities have no suspicion that these organizations wei e over anything but lOQ American. Thin can be gauged from the fact that the President himself sponsored drive by the Committee for American Labour to Aid British Labour to raise 5 000 000 for United nations Bar, 26. 1i Relief. T o axsaples of tills Section s work nay he recorded in a Dr. Kurth Rletli ond b I.G. fterbeadlndaetrie.  & Dr. Kurt Rletb. This uentle in it nay be recalled was the Genasn diplomat who. In 1934 was Charged with doing Razi propaganda work loading u.p to the assassination of Chancellor Dollfuss of Austria. He arrived in the U.S. at the and of March 1941 with the double mission of attempting to buy up American-owned oil properties in Eastern iurooe on the one hand and contacting all U.'-U political groups fawouring isolation on the other the latter in an attempt to hinder application of the Lend-Lease Bill. Ho was in close contact with leading officials of the Standard Oil Co. which has occupied the lime-light Itself recently for its rro-Oeraan activities. Fortumtely Dr. Math received the attention of S.I.S. on arrival in Texfinf en I by the third week in May an imposing doeuaent on his activities w s Smwled to the G. organization for appropriate action. A press campaign was made on an extensive teele by first breaking the story as an oxclusive to Uie New York Herald Tribune anti then by feeding out other angles to other i ewapepera and nows agencies. Rieth wee oeetered by newepRoere for ten days at the end of which he was taken into custody by the FBI and was later expelled from the country.  b I Q Farberdnaustrie. The caapaiga against I.G. Farben was opet d In Novasaher 1940 after months of roseereh on the rasaifieetions of this amazing and powerful German network At the time of course the United litotes were still neutral ami it bad so far been impossible to convince the U.S. authorities of the amount of harm the I.G. Fcrben was doing especially through its connections with the varloua offluosnie of Standard Oil. The only alternative thereforo was to force action through public opinion and on the basis of information cellacted end collated by SIS the campaign wee begun In the middle of November in ih U.S. and In Brazil Colombia Venezuela Ecuador and Uruguay Two weeks later the, 27. eaapalgn bow fruit. 131 Vie -.Pw ldont f Parban U.S.' eosawiny was a German named Wilhelm Von Hath a naturalised American. Bath had done espionage work for Germany in the tJ.S.A. in the last war when he was a Commercial Coumeellor at the German Smbae y in Washington and after the entry of the U.fi. into the war in 1917 h had transferred Ms activities to Saltserland ahere he had worked for a time with the Head of the German Intelligenee Service there. An American citison a wealthy man and a member of all the best clubs in Hew York h was .possibly the guiding brain behind the activities of Fsrben in the U. . Two weeks of res ure propagande in which his name and activities were publicised considerably brought about his resig nation from the company at the beginning of December 1940. The campaign m.g continued for some veoke and led to much public waahing of dirty linen in the late spring of this rear as far as the nefarious work of Standard Oil was concerned. As to the Karbari interoats in the G.8. they were of course taken over by nominees of the 0.3. authorities.  iv Verbal PrcmagRuda. Yh organisation of rumours was under taken on a largo scale. A distinction was wde between rumours which wore intended to be spread by word of mouth nd those which could be printed. As regards the former a large organisation was already at he.nd through the various organisations controlled by Security Coordination. These consisted of an extensive organisation on the waterfronts of ell the principal ports of the U.S. inspectors in all 1runstrial centres spreading down to each factory working on war orders for Britain also ob erv r -i and agents in all the principal ports of Central and South America It was thus possible to spread a rumour throughout the length snd breadth of the U.S. within few hours and more Iwportsnt still to shut off a rumour at any given level of the social strata. As regards rumours & new type of organisation was set up. It was realised that any story which had a British or Allied date-line would, 28. find no cradlbl audlonce Inside anamy tarritory Itself. Thrown an intermediary control was thorafore obtained over . satill Amsrieen new agency and ruaoars were supplied to this si e x5y written up in the fora of n s stories under neutral dste-linoft. These were then issued to the agency s subscribers. On publication they were at once broadcast over the short-wavo to whatover country was indicated m a target. Her s certain amount of cpsed ajsl coordimtion were enrential in noting pub lication and seading the clipping iaaedietely to -he interaadiary for that particular Irniguage broadcast but tills was soon attained to ueh a point that London noted these tvmanrs were penetreting the target country a fortnight ahead of the earn tumour which had boon given direct European circulation.  At th saise tissa every effort was made to ensure a wide range of cuatoMors for this news agency. Particular attention was paid to th foreign language press and within a far months the agency had almost a complete nonopoly auong the Polish press and s wide range of customers among Serb an Crontisn Hungarian and Caech papers.   v Expansion. GlOl visited London at the end of July 1S4X During this visit it was decided that the activities of GP Section were to be greatly expanded along vlth those of all the other - 0 E sections in Hew York. By far th major pro ortion of the work of course vs. taken up in advising and guiding the propaganda section in Colonel Donovan s organization. Colonel Danovnn set up hia organisation in the punier of 1SW1 and designated his Foreign Inforaation Services for political war'sre work. Inevitably it art with 11 the difficulties which nay w organisa tion encounters fro ' vested intarofita1 and tfc prejudieaa of sat-led sinds. Its chief pre-oocu ation was with the short-wave. Unlike Gre.-'.t Britain the 0.8. radio stations are privately owned. To the large chains sueh as th . Rational Broadcasting Company and the Columbia Broadaasting Syatea the short-wave was an expensive luxury since it carried no ad vertising revenue. To others such as OEC arsd Croesiey. It was merely, 29. a medium for exp rla nt %nd teetinr apparatus. Only on the last Coast and KGRI on the %et Coast were concerned with pelitieel warfare over the short-ware and even these would iiave haan in the sleaentary stafes if it bed not been for the concentrated work whieh the O organisation had pat in in the first half of the year.  Robert Sherwood Head of the Porairn Information Services soon found he had an iaposeible job on his hands In trying to bring those irresponsible c aparies to heel. Conditions were chaotic With the ex ception of WBJL and KGEI rw station had effieient translators. They had no sense of ti sin T their new broaicaata. CBS for exaapla broadcast the same news schedule to France several times the smae day without any alteration. SBC refused to accept an offer of translators. When approached direetly all of them even including FHJJL refused to accept the FIS directives -though tJiUL ted been innocently scceptinf P1F. directives through SO for acme onths not knowing of coarse that these came from Britain.  Sherwood asked for G's help and tha ablution was fairly obvious. The G organisation placed its whole adlo organisation at his disposal intermediaries news gatherers translators and broadcasters. For many months while the negotiations between the American authorities and the short-wave stations were proceeding HWL ms unwittingly ioing FIS work through SOE o radio personnel on to their oayroll. Similarly aeny of the keojier kinds who had found their way into such organisations as th Council for Besiocracy also became paid officials of FIS when America entered the war '  As regards actual operations in the tJ.S. after Beceaber 1941 the GP Section was reduced to a skeleton organisation whose functions were   i Intense liaison on behalf of PFS with the FIS  ii Supplying material of all kiwis to PWg in London. As regards co-operation with the FIS th officers in GP action developed an intimate liaison with the key sen in Sherwood e orgnrdaction namely with Jocoph Barnes Head of the Radio Section with Edward Stanley Head of the Publication Section with Sdd. Johnson Head of th Radio, 30. Monitoring Section while Q101 kept in close touch with Shor ood nd Edmond Taylor his principal aas'ietfnt. Q vm thus able to give the FIS erreat help'In a variety of ways -directives when they could get  none fro their own State Department hreadeaatera when they could find  none themselves intelligence material on conditions in &ir pe which  they could not obtain fro any American authority. It was also able to   steer the round many a nasty comer by allowing thers the use of 3GE cable facilities to London for caartudcatlen with FM through their office there in order to discuss any matter sshleh they wished to ba a secret be tween thomselves and r-OE the FIS cable systoa was open to inspection by the State Department . Indeed if it had not been for the presence of SQE In Mew York it is very robable that FIE would not have wvived the first six lonths of its existence cert-inly it would not have besa in aesrly such a healthy state as it later become. At the seme time FOE haa endeavoured to bs the eyes and ears of PW8 in this country. Thanks to the fact that both SIS aad SOS were under the direction of G in this country EOS hue had access to exceptional sources of inforastlon. Approximately ten reports were sent hose each week on conditions in Europe all of these obtained fro . SIS All travellers from urope were interrogated their reports mr correlated compared with other reports and then sent to London.  After Pearl Harbour a new activity was undertaken. On December 7 1941 it was generally beliavsd that the war would aietain American morale at a satisfactory level and that there was no ' no further need for British propaganda in tho B.S. While unable to do ary such propaganda itself however G organisation deplored ony attempt to educe 3ritit h InforaetioB .Services in this country and believed that the results could only be disastrous. At the same tlse there was no sethod of proving this view was correct such reports as there were on American public feel  ing were devoted cither to utmlyals of the various radio comaentators or to 'the press and no attempt had so far been mad by sy utharity either British or A ieric n to follow these throu ii to th broad aasses beneath. At the acme tiae there were an onoraous number of suspicions publications goo of them notorious such as the Chicago Tribune others scarcely known, 31. mrfcsld th lr wm locality  The G orgsRiaation therefore sot itself the task of raeklnr a study of ell Fifth Column publlcntiom most of which It wae smspectod were carrying out active propaganda either wittingly or un wittingly. A lerg list of these was obtained k further list wae obtained from the Council for Democracy and the study began Com parisons were made with Axis short-wave radio broadcasts which it was felt were intended as directives to these publications. Sitaultanoeusly through intara i ' rle the 0 organization conducted a secret public opinion poll on certain fixed piantiom-which are pooed at intervals of a fortnight. Within four months after Poarl Harbour this public opinl'n pall revealed that oro-Hritinh feeling in the U.S. had dropped to 49% of the population the lowest ebb on record. It if true that this drop was partly due to British military reverses but it is nlso true that these reverses war exploited on an enormous scale by the Fifth Column publications.  At the asae tisae GP began shoeing those fortnightly reports to Br. Sherwood. He was so interested that ho showed then to the President himself. The reaction wes remarkable. Tise President used a large portion of one of mi.sao reports in his speech on February รยงth when he lashed out at poison- odileru of ru o6rs and untruths . SiaKiltaneeusly he gave emphatic instructions to the responsible authorities that stern action must be taken agairet these publications which had so far considered'thetaeelvos iwiune under the right of free speech. Since such high quarters were taking action on these continuing reports it was felt that corres pondingly high uarter in England might also be interested in seeing them in order to coordinate action wherever poasi la. Accordingly a talsgr was sent to C.D. advising him of this and it was decided that henceforth a regular telegram should be sent home for C.D. for his information.  By the end of April 19421 there war so much action againrt these Fifth Columnists that it became difficult to trace it all. Public opinion was prepared for the action by a nation-wide campaign in the rose and over the radio which continued at full bloat far several weeks and, 32. which in still ruabllng even now. 57 000 people were inspired to sign a petition for th suppression of Father Coughlin e Social Justice1 . It was banned fro the anils. Illliaa Dudley Pellev a notorious weekly  the G llilo n was also banned Froa the Alls. Through ssoae oversight the authorities omitted to taka action against his monthly edition but this was pointed out In O.P. next report which ant to the President and the necessary action was promptly t-sken. T o not-oricus West oast propagandists Noble and Jones were arrested on charges of having slsndared Getwrsl MacArthur and f-ee 16 years laprlsoment. Court Asher   mblleher of I-Ray faces a charge of sedition and so or.. The rest of them ran for cover and by the beginning of even the all-powerful Colonel McCormick confessed that he felt by no means secure fro the F.P.I. three of ios officers h just exsained tiie ChlCEgo Tribune records. At this tirae the njbltc opinion poll revu 'led that jiro-nrltlsh feeling hnd risen to 85 . At this satisfactory level the G.P section felt it could for the ti being at least abandon the very intensive  sork which these reports Involved and could confine itself to the secret public opinion poll.  The whole project described bove froa Pearl Harbour to June  1942 cost approxiaately 5 000  a small enough amount when it is real1sod that In that period approximately 20 000 000 kmrietiim w r persuaded to change their tlnds in favour of Sritain by the simple expedient of driving out of existence those Fifth Column publications which hal kept than on the other side of tho fence.   vi Conclu.iion. In June 1942 PW decided to set up their own mission In the Gcited states and spTointed the Hon. David Bowe -Lyon to head such a Mission ' Both Colonel Donovan and Mr. Elmer Davis were anxious that the existing machinery for liaison between G organisation and their respective organisations on political warfare matters should not be disturbed but once a decision had been taken In London to despatch n separate mission for political warfare work G and his assistant did everythin within their power to facilitate the new arrangements., 33. In August Mr Boweg-Lyon na his principal segistentj Ir Walter Maas arrived in the United State and. arrangements were at once aafte to hand over 11 the work which previously ted 'been eowhieted by 0 organisetion on behalf of TW. All files and other information in possession of the OP section which were reguested by the PWE missrIon  sere handed over to them and. the transfer of jurisdiction wea made effective in eerrespondence between Mr. Bowea-iyon and CM who had recently arrived In Sew York to take charge of the 5.0. division work ing Imusdietely under G At the same time 050S was transferred to the staff of the PWB mission which &d ita headguartere In the Embassy in Washington. As fro AU'-uat 3 194 Mr. Bowes-Lyon became responsibl for the conduct of all PIE affairs in the United Statue and for all official liaison with the Office of War Information on PWi matters and no further work was undertaken by the 0 organisation on behalf of FSE with th exception of recruiting for the Anglo-American PWI mission in feet Africa which was continued at the express request of Mr. Boweg-Lyon This latter was naturally a temporary measure end cam to on end when the necessary recruiting and 'training for that mission had besn completed. On the cons uent dissolution of the OP section OP was -se conded to work as peraonal assistant to Mr. Robert Sherwood in Ir. Elmer Davis s Office of War Information which had by now absorbed the Foreign Information Service branch of Colonel Donovan s Office fM-Isal  i ilorlnniny. The first attempt to organise Far Eastern Political Warfare on th American continent dates back to a 300 word telegram sent in August 1940 by H.M. Ambassador in Tokyo to H.M Ambassador in Weehlagtes This telegram rldch was drafted by M. . ledman li.0.I. representative in Japan and 0600 then S.I.S. represent ative opsrsting in Japan under a propaganda cover comprised a condensed sum .ary of Oeraan mibversdv activities in Japan It had been preceded, 34. by telegrams re uontln that H M. Eabessy in Washington should secretly arrange for thlt Material to be published in the 0.3. press &s a aeries of articles written by an toerlean suthor and quoting Aaerican sources Ho action was taken in thJ setter by H. 4. Babeasy Washington. Late in April 1341 GS00 arrived in. U.S.A. en route to the Far East to-take up a fffftfttl warfare post with 3.0. Singapore After consultation with G in New fork and invostigatiosa on the test Const it  as decided however that GSOO should rea&ia In Q.S.A. to orysnlaa Far Eastern Political Warfare on this continent. This doclaion ws.' bJised on a conviction that J penes action in the Par East wou1d be con ditioned by th attitude of the United States towards Japanese aggressions it woo necessary therefore to attempt to influence Js' pan by -satorlal published in the 0.S proas and by O.S. broadcasts to the Far East. As a corollary it was sceasary to influence United States public opinion concerning Far Baatam affairs. Another important aspect of political warfare to Japan wt the feet that metorisi concerning German subversive ectlvitiao published in British or Allied tars-ltory unless derived from Aaerican sources wou largely b discounted aa propaganda slicrceg not only was U.S a neutral country but both American Press correspondents and Americas shortwave bro-.dcaating stations enjoyed e reputation for objectivity. Obviously American broadcasts re-broadcast from Singapore and elsewhera in the Far East lould be of more value as orop&fp sue than anything which might emanate from British or A1 led sources. For these and ether reasons it was decided that Me Fork and not Singapore should be the mala bum for political warfare directed against. Japan. la May 1940 therefore plans sere laid to conduct Far Eastern Politics Warfare operations in the United States. This section G.0.5 was formed by 0500 for thin purpose. The operations envisaged ere greatly expanded and in July 1941 0500 temporary attachment to he G organlstation irs New Fork was .made peraarsent.,  ii Policy Policy wm bcood or fch plm for TObvers-ive prepagiamla t Japar proparod for SOB London by GSQO in March 1041. The following comprised tea aein bjeetleea and A. OvieotlW  a 1 brine about a rupture in relations between OsniMiy Kind Japan.  b to damage Jspansee morale by ereeting Internal di83 Ilsi0B8  c to divert Japanese xenophobia into a hatred of Gerasns  d to stiffen resistance throughout the Far Best to Japanese aggression  to stiffen United States resistance to Japanese aggression. s. Mssm 1. To Ja n a German espionage fifth Goluan and other subveraiv activities in Japan  b Propaganda directed agelnat the revoluti nary ac tivities of tha Japanese Militexlsteffesclst eli u a  c actual ssad potential strength of America and her deteralnation to resist Japanese aggression Unity of ASC& Powers t To the Far last Ah in c above.  b Propaganda directed against the Japanese conception of a Greater last Asia Co-prosperity sphere The main target however was Japan the aain pweoempetlon was to Introduce subversive propaganda aaterlsd into Japan and the main weapon use . was anti-German cad anti-Japanese Militarist-faBCiat material.  iii Bro pag&nda Channel The following channels were used .ilLi-rli.... . -. .  a Publication in f S Praas of mwe storte.n articles cartoons and Items by eownantetors.  b internal broadcasts in h .  s simrteav broadcasts in various laramnges beaswd te the far East  d special deily news service froB Singapore  e publication ansi iictrlbutton of peajWete in English  f puhlicetion and distribution of r5 i phlete is Jrip nsse among Japanese corasunities in 3.S, THIS IS A COPY I ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED  g rumours IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 HF rUC Ol ID' r Tl-o nnr  2. In Latin a r America and news stories already published in U.5.A. ' b broadcasts benined from tT.S.A.  c Interml broadcasts  d distribution of pamphlet In English Spanish and Portuguese \  e distribution of pamphlets in Japanese to Japanese com munities. This operation which was In ita Initial stages was stopped by the entry of Aaerica into the war  f news service from U.S.A  g rumours. 5. Philippines and Hawaii Distribution of pamphlets in English and Japanese 4. The Far East a re-broadcasts in various language of American programmes  arranged through 3.0 Singapore at our request .  b republication in various languages and distribution by S.O. Singapore of articles and pamphlets produced in U.S.A. by Section G.0.S5  c inspired despatches from United States correspondents in Shanghai arranged by SOK London and/or SO Singapore at the request of Section 0.0.5  lv Operations. It was decided at the outset that an essential prerequisite for success was complete secrecy. If the' materiel published had been traced to British sources and to British finance not merely would its vnlue have been destroyed but the position of the G organiention would have been Jeposrdlscd and the British cause in this country would h&vo been seriously affected. It must be remembered that a major objec tive of Axis and Isolationist endeavour in U.S. prior to Pearl Harbour was to expose tnibwrslva British propaganda activities. Owing to the talkativeness of Americana in general and American Journalists in par ticular tills imposed a severe handicap on operations. In pitrsTUsn.ce of this policy the organisation of Section G.0.3 the methods used and the Agents end informant employed were almost without exception different from those of the G. P. Section. In addition to other activities an Intelligence service in the U.S. employing a number of Asiatic and non-Asiatic agent and in formants was built up during the few months preceding the attack on, 37. Peart Harbour. Street contacts aero estabtiehes with the Japanese    Ersbr ar.y in Waohingtot -nri the Japanese Consulates in Mew York nd nn Fraaeisco which were used both for intelligence wrijorea and m rtinour channela. Otter contacts eere established with Japanese business circles and among Nisei comaunities in aw York and on the West oast and Japanese returning from J onn were cont et d end questioned. 0.5C0 was  also in street contact with the United States eitisen who was acting as f o-betw0on in the racret negotiati m between Ambassador Noarare. and Cordell Ikill which preceded Minister Watesugi mission to Tokyo In September 1841j and had the advantage f access to all .secret intelligence material relating to the Far East which passed through the f-.I. . xivi ion of British Security Coordination -Tbeae edvantagee were of invaluable aeeintanoo in planning psychologies warfare operations.  Although tht various oporsitiona directed from Section G.0 5 wero orl4-eridef and on a very large aoula it i .gretifying to record that not in one single Instance was the agency uncovered or the informa tion traced to British sources . On more than one oceaoion the Japanese Ambassador to Washington summoned one of 0.500 8 agents to diaeuss material which was being published and it is known that Japanese Consulates in  G.3.A. received urgent Instruetiono from Tokyo to find out what organisa tion we behind this political warfare campaign Reference is also made 1 ter in this report to the special section aaploying ten son irtdeh was set up in the head uarterg of the Metropolitan Police in Tokyo in the autumn of 1841 to deal with tb flood of material on German Fifth Column activities which m ouriir-into Japan from all over th world and to work out the rssaifie&tiens of the organisation which war trying to break Japsneoe-Geraon friond. ship . The following were .the principal operations conducted -sy this Section   clcy iictivlt lu.Jxi i n. A reliable and discreet Americas journaliat nemed C. K Spinks well-known to 0 500 was contacted by him on his arrival frosa Japan. His kno ledge of the written end spoken Ian--nave and experience botli as a, 38. student of Japanese politics and a editor of an Araerlctfn newspaper in Japan afforded him the necessary reputation as un authority on Japanese affairs. H.M. Ambassador's Tokyo Telegram of August 1940 to Washington referred to above was traced and obtained from the archives of H.M Embassy. The material contained was edited and. written up in the fora of an article acceptable to a leading few York newspaper under the signature of the American Journalist referred to above lie-publica tion rights abroad were secured through another intermediary and it was arranged for a news agency to telegraph the article verbstin to London.  SOE London wore advised publication date in advance and requested to obtain world-wide radio and press publicity and made the following  arrengementst  l Publication and editorial comment in the London press  Article cabled in full to H.M. Eabasay Tokyo who had been warned to expect this taaisrisl and that some dip lomatic advantage might accrue.  8 Article cabled in full to Melbourne repeated to Australia and Uev Zealand with a cypher message re commending that full summaries should be broadcast on the Australian radio transmissions to ImoChina nd fear East.  4 Summary of the article sent in Empax telegrams to Stock holm Helsinki Barns Madrid Tangier Lisbon.  5 The Ministry of Information by agreement with SO London took tha following further stops  i The article was handed over in full to Reuters for their Far Sant Service.  il The BJB.C. and British Official Wireless were warned in advance to expect the article and s copy was passed to thorn with a strong recommends.tion that full and early use should be made of it.   6 On publication in U.S.A. tha material contnlned was quoted, THISISACOPY 39.  extensively in e series of broadcasts to th Far East from KGEI and wo widely us 4 by local radio oorasientstora. Furthermore Ambassador in Tokyo telegraphed to tho Foreign Office 1.11 41 that he w a convinced that reproduction in Japan of copies and translations of Spinks and other articles published in foreign countries on Axis Fifth Column work hco proved to bo one of the host piecea of propaganda S work affecting Japan ever done . In tho aaaniiste arrangements sere msde by Section G.0.5 for the article to be syndicated in forty leading newspapers in the U.3. and in Canada. Sisnilnr isarld-vd.de distribution by press and radio was obtained for various other articles which first appeared under the signature of Aaericnn authors in load ing U.S. newspapers and periodicals. 0 P.S. broadcssta to the Far East. The services of the General Manager and Chief Engineer of tho Malayan Broadcasting Corporation than on leave froas Singapore were obtained. Operating under this cover ostensibly to secure ro-broadcasting rights for KGEI programaos the agents performed excellent work. Within a fow months. Station KGEI at that time tho only U.S. shortwave station broadcasting to th Far East was converted from an anti-British organization broadcasting exclusively Hsarot news in English and Chinese only Chinese programmas were entirely unsupervised and - havo reason to suspect wore being used by the onesay to transmit code laasaagea into a atation receiving the folloaring nows eerviepss A.P. U.P. Special U.S. Government teletype services from Washington and Kaw York and a special S.O liawa Service from SinE&poro and radiating programmes and nows cowientariee to the Far East in the following languagesj, 40. English Dnioh Pranch Ghlneae Japanese Tagslog Thai and Xaley. Thais proprsoms were r -broadcast from Singapore and Australia. Section 5 0.3 through this agent acted as Intermediaries in the financing and establishment of a new 100 &.V. station K in. 8nn Pranciaco The Soetion also acted in the reeruitaent of broad casting perconael for tills station which is now broadcaBting in the above languages to the Far East.   c t-vlce frtja. 3 rS In order to overcame probloas of rapid overt cost.lunic&tion between Kew York and Singapore British and Overseas Features was famed in flew York as a cover organisation. An S.O. agent was appointed as Singapore representative. This arrangement enabled the 0 organisa tion and 3.0. Singapore to transmit as news telegr sas material designed for rmblicetion in the press or radio either in rite Far Fast or in  O.3.A. Th-i enforced liquidation of British and Overseas Features did not interrupt this service. Section G.0.5 arranged with the Manag ing Stlitor of Newa-eak for the appointment of the Singapore af'ent as Mewamek repreaentative. Copies of his daily news talagraas were pasaed by Jtewswsok to the Foreign Information Services of Colonel Donovan and  teletyped to KGRI in San Francisco. During the period of J-panose in filtration intp French Xndo-Chlna these telcgr' me were consider - so valuable by F.I.C th t they war teletyped to Washington and tended daily to the President.  This arrangement with Singapore was valuable in many ways. It enabled S.O. Singapore to rmp ly daily the type of material as if from an American correspondent which required wide publicity in the Far East the publicity was achieved the following day in the form of U.S. broadcasts from KOFI which were re-broade-st in various languages from Singapore. It provided a quick counter to Japanese radio propagate ate a monitoring service of Japanese domestic broadcasta  Ahieh e&asot bu nenitorad in U.S.A. ., 41.  si Mater i intrecucea into Jag&R In addition to propaganda by ahortwave broasicaata in Japanese a great deal of written material was introduced into Japan. Th nranda of letters contAining material in Japanese wore posted froa different jiointa an many thousands of pamphlet . In Japanese were  ugpled on board J'p ne se ships ssiliny from wrts on the American continent. Possibly the moat fruitful means of getting material into Japan however mr Indirect  a It is certain that every Japanese Consul throughout the world isMedlately telegraphed to the G-iausho the contents of articles in the local Press on Gamas Fifth Column activities in Japan and similar subjects this was a chief ressor for endeavouring to secure world-wide publicity and newspaper sjyndication for material published by Section G.O B  b Nl&ny tbouafinds of Japanese living abroad amJ no doubt may hundreds of Germans and Italians with friend3 in Japan clipped uch aoterial froa their local newspaper and enclosed It in letter. to Japan. The most important single operation conductod in this field however wm on a high political level. A member of the Japanese Diet then visiting Washington was contacted by ona of 0500 9 agents nnd in duced to write pm thirty personal letters to influential nstabUltiee in Japan. In order to avoid U.R. Datin-American and Japanese sensorship the fallowing arrangements were sad  a the outer envelope containing the letters was franked and cancelled registered airmail Special Delivery at the Washington post office.  b tb package ms flown by special courier by arrange ment with the White House from Washington to Hansanlllo Mexico nd handed by delivery boy s if froa the Mexican post office to the Captain of a Japanese ship sailing for Japan together with a personal letter froa the Piet member. The individual letters were sealed stomped and, 42. addressed in Japanese They were posted in Japes by the Ship a  captain on his arrival.  Ths e letters vers all of niailsr tenor Ineosauch as the  addressees wore exhorted in different ways to bring influence to bear  to staao oat the deraan aen&ee in Japan Each letter enclosed a copy  of a Section 0.0.S peaphlet deseribing Oenaen subveraive actiTitiee  in Japan.   e lisMMSE2aa ..MMll a Those inoludadi   i the obtaining of two high-powered transmitters for Singapore as a special Presidential dispensation under Lsssa-Lend. Fortunately o/ ing to the alow workings of officialdom in London end in Singapore them trans mitters were still in V 8 A on December 7th  ii survey and analysis of all Japanese language newspapers published in 0.3 A. i  ill investigation i analysis of Japanese propaganda activities in O.S.A. including racial propaganda among  Uegroes   iv t of Japanese on the %st Coast and the rendering of sailstance in this investigation  v a radio eon-Aentatars ir internal broadcasts in Various broadcasts were air aade by 0.0.S agents  vi i  vil exchange of information concerning Japaaeae Intelligence with Colonel Donovan g S.I.S and the F.B.I   vlii the 0.S authorities were persuaded to heck an all orders for radio ec lm nt to prevent coppliee reaching the enemy through neutral intermediaries   ix rt rld wide ublieity for the Japan Inio-China Secret Protocol Before publication the taxi of this protocol was passed to tho President and to Cordell Hull for use by tho latter in the impending Hull/teirusm conversations. Publicity included cemantary on all shortwave transaiarion beaatsd frora the United Ststoo to France.  x sponsoring of pamphlets. Sponsoring printing and dis tribution of pamphlets by patriotic societies and maga zines Pamphlets In Japanese were sponsored by The League of Patriotic Japanese Residing Abroad . Vnrioue agents end intermediaries were used but in each ease evidence was manufactured to indicate that finance was provided by Japanese elements oprosed to the Militarist regime in Japan., 43. V. CaneluaioB Under tb direction af GSQO the Section continued to conduct Far Eastern poliileel crf r operntions in the Seatern Hemisphere in liaison with CBI and OSS until Auguet 3rd 1944 when Mr. 8ewe -Lyon s PS'E Mlaeion took oror. Tltiss involved otserations in collaboration with Mr. ELaaar Pavia's Office of War Inforaation arse Colonel Donovan1 s Office of Strategic Services the s.mlyaes of Japan ese political w rfare and radio propaganda tire preparation of leaflets in the Japanese language etc. In this connection it is of interact to note that the first twelve American leaflets in the Japanese language designed for dis tribution by plane or other manes In Japanese end J&p&nass-oeeupisd territories the first printing of which asouatad to 300 000 copies although printed and distributed by 0 1I ware largely the work of this section including the actual translation into J panose. In all th text and translation of soaa forty-one separate leaflets running into aany oil ions of copies ware oroduoad by hi section in collabora tion with Ofl. Thaae Included a Ptwrender leaflet which was recently used with startling effect at Ouadaleanal whan for the first time in . any war contingents of Japanese troops were induced to surrender by prouieea of rood treatment frara the enemy. Qtl have stated that ne reported in the U.8. press various groups af Japanese troops including officers Mate over to the U.S. lines waving co ise of this surrandor leaflet and that practically all Japanese orlfoners taken were found to be carrying oeplan of Japeneee-laaguag leaflets prepared by this office In collaboration rith 0WI. These incidents are an Indication of the vast potentiality of expert political warfare directed against Jap nese front line troops. 0 1 have also stated a. thet PWE Washington have discon tinued colleboration with 0WI in the preparation of Japaueae-language leaf lets and b that the only Japan ae-lanyuage leaflets distributed by the U.S. Araed Forces or other Agencies aro those prepared by 0 1. From August 3 1S4 the G organisation ceased all official liaison with Old except on Mr Bowes-Lyon' behalf. The Far Eastern, 44  political warfkrw wer i placed at his disposal t mv& copies of all Par Pastern politic warfare reports sent to S 0. London since the inception in April 1941 of political warfare operations directed against Japan frost the Western Renlsffeere war forwarded to PS8 Washington The section various contacts were also handed over to Mr. Bowes-Lyon this office contliaiod to carry on Far Eastern political war fare liaison with OWt including the preparation of Japamee-langaage leaflets on behalf of Bo as-Iyon fro August 5 to October 15 1942. During this period report war sent to PWE Washington for forwarding to London, 46  V'-JKOWc .. r ir . a iiy flpis.Jfelag th G org.sRiwti.oR is divided into -ix swetlc-na.   i Latin Agntri 0 0.1  il Miiioritie C.u. 2  iii I  iv i  v T  vi A  vii L Kvery fortnl.. ht eaefa section draws up a report on its nrogr and these report are eolluted into s general I ortrslgfetly progress report whlfth is sent to London Utin tvK-jrlca.   I D-y. loaKent. The 6 0. OrgenisstiRB in Latin a-.erica has had & rapist growth. In dune 1941 only six Chief Agent wer ope &ting and their sol ans of set saiestiens with the G office ware by L M T Cede At that time the ctir wsst eoeat Louador Peru and Chile w&8 considered part af G.JGOO territory and one suVageat for each f those e-untrie  as in oosesuKisati s with Bogota but not with New forte. Twelve nooths later S 0 hew fork h d ..i Chief Agent at work in wvery Lavin teeriean country exceut for Guatcjasls Paragsay en i the Suianas  II OveratioiiS Ivhl-1942. The Q orgmimtl-em att 'pt 1 very few eyeratiorw-.. during 1941 Cevaral plans in connection with mmey shipping that ware prepared had to he cancelled before the time eanc for carrying thaa out. Three iest -itces of th-effectiveness of S 0. acticn in the ..olitiesl field my however be . uot d.  a la July 194-1 a Masi plot to seise power in Bolivia was dr ught to li hi in tia for the local governsx-nt to thwart it. this was Bade pesalbl by th iaic rception of a doeur-rot fro kajor delrwite. Lollvisa Military ettacht in Berlin eontsiaiog the details of the project -i revolt รยง 0.1 say Icgltiaeteljr t..ks th . credit for tdiwtpocars which besides strcngthealag tht . osltlon of fch suti-Asds Bolivisn 6 Vsnicej'it led to the adoption of MB ro s security mmumsvm thr ughout louth America and eneeur ged t. wave f anti- Sazi feeling extendiar to the U V,  b In October 1941 shortly ftcr the Cj.&ratlon by the U.S. of a shoot on sight policy11 towards German submarines the President made a r.dio address to the nation in which he s -id 1 have in my possession a map of Douth America drawn up in Berlin The map to which the President referred was a Gem.ar document showing the proposed partitioning of uth America in accordance ith the new World Order dividing it into colonies and sphere of influences of the Axis powers. Although the actual map was never published this revelation of the Presid nt s was very widely quoted and discussed and played its part in bringing to the people of America the realization that this was not merely another European War but that Hitler had designs on the Western Hemisphere just as far-reaching as he had on the Old World. It is believed that only three copies of this ap were ever made one of which remained in Hitler s personal possession one in that of Bojhle A.O. Chief and the t ird was sent to Von Thsrtann German Amba-sador in the Argentine The G organization mt able to obtain the original frost the German'Embassy in Buenos Aires and was instrumental in placing it in President Roosevelt s hands  c President Vargas of Brazil whose son-in-law was President of tho Brazilian branch of the LATI airline was long reluctant to take any measures against this Italian Company. His attitude changed overnight however when the American Ambassador in Rio de Janeiro was able to bring to his attention & lett r written by General Liotta the President of the Company in home to a correspondent in Brazil which contained insulting r fe.' ences to Brazilians in general iand to Vargas in articular. It was due in great part to the existence of t is letter that the Loti concession in Brazil was revoked ten weeks before Brazil broke off relations with the Axis powers. The G organization was fortunate enough to bo the means of bringing -t is letter which was in the fora of a irdcrophotograph concealed in the lining of an Axis-sympathizer s clothes to the attention of the American Ambassador in Brazil 1th the satisfactory results indicated above  i-U Qr-i.rations 1942-1943 .   1 The ftlo Conference The yv-ar opened with a major diplomatic triumph for the United States The State Department managed to  unite n.arly all the countries of Latin America en the side of the United  Nations by inducing then to agree to break diplom. tic relations .dth some  or all of the Axis po rs. At first it seemed as if thes. agreements were  to be merely a polite gesture of approval towards the Allies but the  patient behind-the-scenes work of the State Department officials the  lavish use of Export-Import Bank funds both for personal and for public  purposes the m asures of Continental Defence taken by the U.S. Artsy  and Navy the distribution o ' anr-smsnts on the Lend L .&se plan the constant  interchange of iplors tic visits by U.S. Arid Latin A-nerisan politicians  and the increasing severity of U.S. and British control ovt Axis activities  through Black Lists dup rtatione and internments have Etibs the agreements, 47  of the Confe anc a fonnidabl-re ilty. The method of State Department diplomacy has been to g t an agre Q nt and then to posh forward from it until another osaible agree ent comes in sight much further ahead. Thus  several countries full of Germans and Italians w ich felt it was a bold  step to break with the Axis are now taking steps against Axis nationals and property which is little short of w&rj and in several of them a ceeiar tit of war ha. actually bet spon ..meously prop wed.  This policy o the State Department has entailed a huge increase in the numbers and personnel of U.S. agencies operating in Latin American countries It is enough to say here that the staff of a single U.S. Intelligence organisation in nc or two Latin American countries Is marly ns l rge as that of all British Intelligence organizations throughout the sub-continent -and that there are .-any more agencies secret or open working with it in collaboration or competition. By sheer weight of numbers therefore the Americans have reduced a s ing of opinion against the AjcLs in most Latin Arerican territories. They ose as accusers and as judges so that t is very hard not to t ink of the Axis nationals as crimin.-lB. They uphold the banner of righteousness with such fe-rvour and conviction t .-t the Germans and Ja. anese inevitably appear to be the forces of evil. Add t tills the huge flow of United Nations propaganda which passes through most Latin American countries and it is easy to see why  the Axis position has deteriorated very gravely throughout Latin America  in 1942.  There is however another result of this peaceful invasion. The South Americans hav ometiraes admired the wealth the comfort and the energy of the U.S. They have never respected North Americans f r their tact their good manners their Ideals or indeed .for any spiritual qualities. They are apt to consider them dishonest coarse greedy vulgar and impercipient. This impression has been strengthened by the methods of the new U.S. agencies in South and Central America and to a certain extent by the b haviour of their personnel. There are reports on this fro  countries widely separated and as differ it as Mexico Costa Mica Brazil Paraguay and Argentina. The r suits of this growing dislike ..r not yet ', 43  serious. In Paraguay huge Anfrican airr.'ort on which construction had actually been started had to be abandoned because of quarrels between the Americas offici -is and the Paraguayan army and Gorerarmt. In Chile certain rgencies of the ..oliee and certain political parties are coming eliuply to refuse a ope ation ith the Americans at ojny piice. In n arly every country the native Fascist parties which originated under Axis influence are now kept g.ing by anti-American feeling. There is  .o likelihood that this feeling will diminish. On the contr ry it will probably increase t the point where very serious disorders ill l e provoked by the continual presence and interference of U.S. officials in the Good M ighbour republics. This w aid no oubt be sad but it is not our concern. The State Cep rtmcnt s policy has always been o coBfcine winning the war ith securin . the maximum S private adv&ntape for the United States of A-.erica. The anti-i nkee reaction in the Latin c tintriso will hamper toe second of these d signs rath r than the first.   2 The Charter of S.Q S.O. was created in Latin America to operate in case any of the c untries concerned entered the war against us or was invaded by our enemies. The er nts of 1942 have .de both these contingencies improbable although net im ossible. In addition the agreement between the Foreign Office me the State Department is such that no dir ct S.O. operations art rmissible even if desirable ithin the  U.S. sphere of influence. Nevertheless there has been a great deal which could and si ula be none by -brltish agency concerned with operations rather than pun intelligence without infringing the sovereignty of the several countries or th hegemony of the U.S Many Latin American countries harbour izeable pr ulations of first second or third generation Germans Italians and Japanese some of them were sectionally or -hclly dominated by the capital of Axis nationals or Axis sympathisers all of the contained important parties and reonalities who although indigenous 'ore actively sympathetic to the Ar.is The &lo Conference an the .activities of the Americans alone c old not neutralise all these f roes. For various reasons in various countries it was absolutely necessary for a British geney to gather intelligence t uphold British interests tod to take teps against, 49  our encmi-8. This is what S.G has \d-avoured to do throughout 1942   3 Security Scheiie. The first and most interesting aohicvwent of S.G has been the creation of the Security ache to defend British and in conjunction American 'lines oil fells railways ieetric orks meat plants and irailar services against d ssag or destruction b the Axis or their agents. This acher.e is now in full operation training -nd posting security i.fleers throughout S .uth America negotiating with various coop nies to irtprov supply nd repair facilities watching the always difficult Isbour situation nd ultisitely it is toped establishing the corr ct frame of mind in British aostmaiitiee connected with all these vital strategic services. Various agencies had a part in rigin&ting the  scheme hut it was really put into action s a result of a report on the  security of strategic rat. materials written in the Mew York office at the request of G by G18 007 in collaboration with the staff of GI section.  The plan was conceived by G orked out toy Gte G14G and others of the staff and h need to CM250 and Gol6 in collaboration with the officers f Gf to put into practice it le new in full swing and has alrt dy trained and sent bac t their posts a numb r -f keenly enthusiastic pupils. Hitherto the instruction given to security ffieurs has been indepenaunt of S 0. GM250 and the other organizers of the scheme are of course trained .0. men but the existence of S.O. as a world-wide organization is not known to visitors and pupils from South America. On the other hand the more intelligwnt and aatiirs'ly S.O.-minded as ong '..he will not find it 'iffieult to conceive of the existence of such an organization as a possibility and in the v at of any disaster coia a ra.bl t the invasion of Malaya these men ould without doubt be able and willing to  s  put their training to a different use. Thus the security scheme otcntlslly involves counter-sabotage n S.G. lines as well as peaceful protection. It should be emphasised th t the conception of this scheme c uld scarcely have been carried out with the same convenience and diroration by any other British agency working in America -and certainly not by the A ericans themselves whose . art in the entire scheme has been secondary ', 50   4 a'ensures. The three chief factors in irsolving the Axis organisation in 4stin Amfrica have beans  a The ieciaration of war by Brasil Mexico and the Central Arcr.lean republics  b The implerentation of the Eio Agreement.  c The bl&ck lists. The erk of S.O. against the Axis has mostly been done under the first and second of theses heads Li.tin Aaserican politicians and officials are naturally in-olsnt easil corrupted and characteristically obstinate. The Gensane and other Axiser were in severe Latin American countries more -t home than either the British or the Araricans. The S.O task has been to organize opinion against them to press officials and oliticoes to curtail their liberties and to mao their lives a burden in every possible way. The Mew 'fork Office and the offices of the S.O field agents have accumulate.d very large stores . information in files card-indexes and Eemories of Axis personalities and sympatMsers in nearly every Latin American republic. S.O h .s agents in all e cept Bolivia P aguay and Peru while even in Peru S.O. is still in contact with former agents who are called on in emergencies. Eelatlons with loc 1 govemr-mts m& -.Lth  British Missions have iapreved enomously urin the year the difficult part was during the first months when information was still incomplete and agents had n. t proved their value to the local officials and groups with -horn they had to worts. Jiow each forward step makes the next one easierj there Hn .an increasingly large number f sources c.f infoxmtl much greater familiarity with the problems of each territory and considerably  o re .r stige with centacts ihtaost f them. The activities of S.O agents hav--. naturally v ried in ifftrarst countries and therefore must be treated separately. They all have the same cad in view but different directives were issued to acb of then. and their characters .contacts and methods are very v&iisd.  A COLOMBIA.  G5 50Q started under the worst as itole aurpices. His predecessor had finally quarrelled with the British Legation with C organisation and with the Color ian ministers and ffici&ls. By his cm peculiar combination, 51. Towards the end. of 1942 the New York office obtained information that the former Japanese Consul General in Bogota o&d bro.dcast an apparently innocent messao goodwill to the Japanese living in Colombia. On examination the mes. age proved to be an order discreetly veiled in Japanese Impli ation to continue working c behalf of the Empire and to maintain caunttlenticns v.ith Tokyo. S.O S York s-nt tiW. infoimtlon to 05 500 with the suggestion that action should be taken to curb the liberties of Colombian Japanese and that it should be made p. rfectly clear t th E that this ws .he result of the subversive message sent to them by their officer. G5 500 submitted the information nd the suggestions thr ugh discreet channels to the Mini ..ter of I r the Secretary of the Interior and the National Police and according o his recent telegrams drastic action has been t xen on then while he has been thanked for his help.  His chief pur ose has been in accordance with the New York directive t purge Coliaabia of Germans and German firms altogether. It will n t be enough arorely to deport t e leaders. That would -illoe the mass of Gern'&ns t rerain and the firms to continue working perhaps under a Colombian cloak. The leaders were repatriated in t-n. s ring of 1942 and the main Maxi org&alaatian broken up. His present aim is to procure-the repatriation of all the remaining Germans who ar. below or above military age and who are not experts In some activity valuable t Germenyi and then shortly afterwards to intom the rest either in Colombia cr preferably in British or American territory. S.O. Hew York have been' in constant correspondence with him on this subject .and h. ve discussed it at length with the XB exparts in the C organization here with s a a satisfactory agreement has been reached. At ...resent the list as prepared by hiss added to by S.Q.and pruned by the C organization ia beiisf studied by the Minister of Foreign Affairs.  The C organisation has been working hard on the blacklisting of various fneny-controlled fir sj but G 500 fc s done a good deal to help. His latest contact is with the C lesbian Income Tax Bureau and he expects that he can do much through it to harass the enemy., 52  of tact and energy assisted by h s twenty-five re experience of doing business in South America C 500 has entirely rev reed this position and now he is a valued friend of the former Chief of Police and persona grata both with H.M.K. and with several Ministers His methods have been roughly similar to those used by the U.S.A. in Chile but far more discreet and fur more kindly to the delicate susceptibilities of Latin American .  G14 100 another agent with long experience of the subcontinent works in the same way in Brazil He prepares dossiers against Axis organizations groups and personalities. He submits these to the proper Colombian authorities and continue s to press them suavely . ut firmly until action is taken. When action jyg taken it ic usually successful . nd he can i proceed to th next case with added prestige. For instance in December 1942 he submitted reports on Lrich Outer -nd Wilhelm Dittmar -two Ger-ans living in th . naval bast of Cartagena The Rational Police instituted starch o their homes and discovered a clandestine I'/T set photostatic equipment nd a masher of incriminating documents. The cn are to besent to a penal colony the Rational Police have taken the credit nd 5 500 3 credit with them has been enhanced. In the sara month he suggested to the Rational Police that the activities of Rudolf Schouplcin of kedeilin deserved investigation. The Police s arched hie house and found n fc onlv doeweoats ich proved that he was mraged in subversive activity on behalf f Germany in collaboration with one Theodor Kurok who had been hitherto unsuspected except by S.O. but a large quantity of bonds which he had coneealed. Other bonds -were found in Kurek s home. Possession of these bonds which ought to have been deposited in the Banco d la Republics in a blocked account is S illegal so they were confiscated. This little deal has sent C5 500 s stock up even hi her. He followed it up by sending through the Press Department notice of the discovery tv all local police stations the implication being that if they too searched the houses of Gersens In their district they might find bonds too. He is still proceeding on this line, 55  Here is another of his activities on a rsthar different plan . Early in the stumer of 1942 a new opposition group appeared in the shape of a totalitarian /arty renown aa Accion Nacional It had headquarters in the province of Antioqula note that one characteristic of Fascist parties is to start in to import nt provincial centre r ther than the capital    Munich Milan Sao Paulo etc. and was spreading to other cities with  considerable rapidity. G5 500 went to Medellin with & nesiser of the  Hational Police aa de his investigations and wrote a long report on its character an- aims. This report was then given to the former Chief of  Police who submitted it along with further details of Axis and 'Falange activity as & report by himself to a group of prominent Libtral Congressmen .  They were extremely sr-r eked at the boldness and openness of this anti democratic activity and de ended Ccmgres-ional investigation. It was held and the Accion N cional wa. abolished. Such F scist parties have given S.O. so much trouble in other countries that 05 500 s work in abolishing this one was obviously enough by itself to justify his entire organisation in Colombia.  B. CHILI . Gil 000 is a.- siat nt Military Attache in Chile and works on a method f is own which is ad irably adapted to Ms character and to the character o his territory. The republic is full of Germans who occupy its entire southern section the Army is very pro-Gerw n the coastline is painfully exposed U attack from the Pacific and the rich are desperately afraid of coEawunisir . There are indeed too m ny difficulties for S.O. to combat without an enormous rganiz&tion which would have -Imost as .m&ay disadvantages ae advantages. 011 000 therefore determined to concentrate on one central activity which night be described as secret politics. He is himself a very sincere left-wing liberal an he saw that vithout the help of the liberal elements in the c untry he could a nothing. He there fore sought out all tr. leaders of left-wing groups in the Cabinet in the Trades Unions end in rty organisations generally and b-mt all bis strength on convlncin them a to act together and b to press for a rupture of relations with the AMs. Such groups as experience has proved are all too apt to squabble among themselves and neglect the vein issue, S4  and there are s6V ral c-untries.in h ch lib rails bcans little r. re than plaintive and ineffectual pacifism. Gil 000 . nt ucb time in smoothing  ov r the differences which arose am.ong these elements and in mggesting a unified strategy fer then t pursue. He was constantly in touch with  t e Socialist Congress an Oscar Sehnake and with a more important figure the Minister o the Interior i e . Home Secretary Haul Mor lee. It was to Mor 'less that the report of the Investigating Committee unerverlng Axis  activities wa addressed -the report wa -artly written by Gll 100 who  had done such of h detectiv-work on which it was baaed -and it was Morales who became thr .okesesa of the forces aiming at a ruptur of  relations with Germany .md her allies.  Through trm 611 000 has bee working on the Cabinet and the Pre idsnt for months. Durin the-closing ronths of 1942 his long and pati-nt political pressure in Santiago aided an. advised wherever possible by the New fork office with which he was const fitly in touch r suited in the secret mission o Sr. Morales to Washington. Although this mission came after the disclosures of Gen an espionage in Chile . Ich were made by the American Govcrnairnt It .is understood that it was not in sired primarily by these isclosures but by Sr. Morales discussions with 011 000 This is confirmed b th-fact that while in Wachingtaa he maintained the closest reLatissas with 0040 nd through nim with GU 000 and besides obtaining the earliest and mo t accurate inform .ti j on Ms negotiations i is no exaggeration to say that S.O. played a coi. iderable part in bringing about their success.  G11 000 -x&t used all other available mean o' influ ncing public opinion. Meny o these were too tenuous to b described but a ass m.eting which he porn ored must be mentioned. It asee-bled nearly hundred thousand -ople all clamouring f r aid ta th democracies and evidently it created a deop inspression for .. surrey f Chilean opinion prepared by the U.S censors a month later showed that a v ry 1 rgr proportion of letters from Chil referred t it with r.g or with eyadration as the  writer was Ger.an or -ro-allied.  a, One final cample of hi methods of S.O. in Chile When the  negotiations r.ith Washington were first mooted the New York office cabled G11 000 that he should impress his friends in the Cabinet with the necessity of implementing ill greeamts between Chile md the U.S.A full/ -sd promptly. Otherwise it was pointed out the U.S. ud ht be justified in perforaiing its part of the agreement slowly nd incompletely. He judiciously kept this alet until Morales returned from IRashington whori he took the opportunity of -ointing it out t th new Foreign Minister Fernandes. It was received itfa interest and 4th resoeetj -and Is osltian ns a  disiatercstod adviser haw been again improved  mm . In Brasil 014 200 stoves between Ho and Sao Paulo. 814 100 lives in the strategically impertmt northern port f Eecife. Brazil has been at war for 1 rgc part . f 1942 end has been much ssen e invaded by the U.S. than oth r countries in Latin America so that neither of these mm has had such opportunities &c the other agents.  614 100 has howev r played a art similar to that of 85 500  in Colombia When the Bio agreement wa sigmd with Brazil playing a  l-'ading .rt the Germans Italians -nd Japaneee Iertio teJy became  objects a suspicion. But neither the Brasilian police n r tht still new  U.S. Intelligence officers knew w ich oi them were dangerous. G14 1C had been watching the Qwrnens in his osn iistriet for o e time sad proceeded to subiait doeaiera both on th strongly naslfied col miee of P&ulista and Bio Tinto . uad on a nuebe of individual Germans to the authorities. Copies of thes-through & cut-out went to the rdioary police the Political. Police O.O.P.S. the divisional HQ of the local Bilitar co and the 8-.. v-aor end ev ritually to Rio de Janeiro Meanwhile he arranged far the local llazis to be watched day Ml ru ht their correct.oaflencc to b watched and their telephones tapped. On January 26 1942 the Minister of Justice cabled to Recife ordering a thorough investigation of Rio Tinto .'aid Paulista with the, รยง6  iHMdi&t i.rrest of all Germtuia implicated in .-..ibverrivo activities. After three day of raids all the leading M i in ih -iiatrict mm in prisfsa and fciitlr housoa ware being aearthed 014 100 was virtually 'i.irccting these raids froo b hind th. scenes. One of bh Gerasna broke down after cross exa-ination and admitted having engaged in espionage against United Netione shipping. From him the police were able to trate ant to break down much of the spy ring based on the firm of Hermann Sbolts many of its members are rr w in prison. 014 103 would have been more sueeessful with this excellent r-ro eet if n.e had n-.-t discovered too much. The laterventor  or Federal Governor of Per n'buoo ilreeted the Chi- f . f Police not to raid Rio Tinto and Psulista so as to avoid antagonising the Lundgrens the big Swedish cotton H-agaates o controlled th district and when a letter from the Sasi chief in P&ulista was discovered which revealed that the Xntervsntor s om newspa. er Folha da Manba was pufowidlzed by Dr a  Gosbbcls from Berlin the .ntir investigation was stopped by the Intcrventor s orders  Howev r. It m- not r -ncntly stopj.ed. By fchu directing the att ntlcn of the Federal Government and s the-Army to Peraambaco which is in a strategic position on the n rth-e st -f brazil 614 100 had act a long train of events in motion The Gemans iisplicated either left the country r were kept under const at and harassing -urveillance so that t eir activities were gravely impeded. At intervals 014 100 would suggest tint further restrictions sr ld few placed on them -f-n instance the confiscatico of their driving licences. The Intenr nior fell gradually into iisf&v nr and hi efforts to s ve him. . if i.spli-ated him further. By the end of 1942 he nad been replaced by Colonel Pinto Alriwo the Brndgrens motorlawiohes w.ich014 100hadsuspected ofprovisioningand/ or refuelling r/ahmerines had been .ut under strict control nd the entire Lundgren property hd been placed tmder the jurisdiction of the Array. 614 100 s Ion .-x.rie&ee of Brasil And hie cullar t lent for nosing out suspicious Gerosans were . Iso eaployed by C .Tgealeation in Rio with which he corresponded on v 'ious s .-pects inc Jin. the  Bati air lin gr.up an interesting exarp.1 of hi gifts emerged in, S7  Dec ffiber 1942 The U.S. authorities asked C if they kn w anything of  Erast Jonner a Brazilian Boche who was believed to be engaged in espionage  in Portugal The query happened to eoree to the attention of New Yoric office  of 8.0. and was sent down to 014 100. Be replied by sending up a four-page  report covering Jenner s activities back to 1934 and even including three  photogi apljs. It was evident that h-had had him on his little list for  a long time. The information was sent to the Americans and to C .  It should be added that Gl4 100 has given the kind of proof of patriotism which i hardest to give. He lives in Eecife wher- . the British colony is not very large. He has often been snubbed or derided for not joining more whole-heartedly in the British war effort end for associating with a lot of very doubtful QmT&sms and Brasilians. In addition he is engaged In a business wich has for is competitors been extremely profitable during the war his work for 8.0. has occupied hin so mch however that he has lost t great deal of money and opportunities to make more That type of self-sacrifice is nearly as demanding as fc'.e awre glorious risks of the front line.  G.4 200 who la nearer the capital of Brazil has had little opportunity to do anything but intelligence work. But he and several admirable contacts who he has rude h&v supplied 3.0 with cost valuable background material for the Brazilian reports. One of his friends is at present engaged on penetrating the Xntegrsllst Po-rty which will certainly renain c danger to British interests even after the war. If we cannot disrupt the party we can at l-.ast keep an fait ith Its plans. He has already supplied S.O. with a great deal more information than is already possessed either by C organisation or by the Americans ab ub the loading .orsanaTitles and the organisation of this moveawat.  D. CU4DGRt G5 200 in Ecuador has been playing much the same part as his opposite number in Colombia But he has had three additional difficulties to face. The first is that the Ecuadorean police and politicians are much more weak and corrupt than the Colombian . The second is that the American Ambassador Mr. Boss long who has a German wife was always determined to be & Good Neighbour and to concentrate on securing the economic domination of Ecuador by the U.S.A. rather than on c.-untoracting, 58  the activities of the enemy. This is not only 05 200 6 opinion but that of the British Minister of the and even of the U.g. Legation's om attaches. The third difficulty mi at have tu-Tiad out a great advantage it is that on of 05 200 8 chief Ecuadorean contacts use an important politician who had the misfortune to be Involved in an unsuccessful revolution and exiled after a period of iaprlsonmmt. Had he been successful of course 05 200 s roaition would have bee extraordinarily favourable.  Immediately after the Rio conference 05 200 drew up e list of undesirable Germans for expulsion. There were about five thousand in tiie country he felt that only about & thousand were active Sssis and that they could be controlled if two hundred of their leading  I  spirits were deported. However the Government was extraordinarily reluctant to take any action against them and the U. S. Legation exerted no pressure. It was apparent fcnat the Germans must be paying  considerable sums of money to some high government official to keep out of trouble.  G5 00 therefore approached tue chief of Security Police and offered him 40 sucres per man about Jr .10.0 for every German shipped out of the country. He took this offer but his superiors were evidently getting more for they temporised sad were evidently determined not to act.  The next step was to approach the Immigration authorities and ask. them to list those Germans whose papers were not in order. Ifeny of 05 200 s selectees were on the list. Since it was unnecessary to get higher authority to arrest them on this technical charge a number of Germans and two Spanish Falangists were taken to prison. One of the Germans made the se Lous mista e of threatening the Chief of Folic and the Minister of Justice witu a firing squad  s soon as his friends took over the country . This put the government on its settle and they began to take stronger action. -A nuaber of important Germans were deported in April and nor in May -June., 59. At thi oint however thi threat of revoiufcicm irr. rvened. There were i ny arrest- f im. ort t politlciaiis in Ad-Aprll . ad tn outbreak at th end of May in h eh 05 200 lest . veral good cent eta . The Lice and detectires were taken off the Gertraas to w&tc fccuadorean aue ects. Nevertheless G5 200 worked on coopiling evidence and following up th steps already taseo. By the muBBer he could report to SO.that many Ctenren issinessee had closed d vai th.t there were not Wire than forty dang r.a. G..rr ans left in th country nd tl t t s wlto did remin usuaily had Ecuadorean ties which rendered them s ighlly less dangerous.  The ork still h.. t tet eon . ted. The U.S. Attaches and the local branch of th-. F.B.I. asked G5 200 to rt-parr s or ndu on future measures to be tAicen against the Axis elcamts in Ecuador. I did t isj they vetted it and it was submitt d tc tf G vcmsHent through the U.S. Embassy the riti-h minister end th Belgian Charge d Affaires. It was appr ved by all oxce-t the U.S. Embassy. This ns t r t after eight or nine  .onths work 05 200 fc -d succeeded in e. t blishing h v.sdf as the h .d i '111 anti-Axis activities in Ecuador. MeanwtrJ e all Axis n tlcn&ls were expelled froi . th. c .-still vinc s Esru-r-1'as nc. Maasabi.  In the autusn G5 200 at rtfc- J icg tiations for irother step. The President w&e o vi it the U.S.A. i dtmubly uld return full of e g-rness to d-something t rova devotion to Pi n-Americanisas. G5 200 proposed th..t -oncentratlcn eaa. a sh aid be set up for all remaining Axis nationals or sympathisers and .ffer d the police aufch. -Ities reasonibl sum to which b.s American opposite numb.r c ntr atrd for the c nstruction . nd maintenance o uch a camp. This scheme W&.8 eld up by vari us delays aad aft r 11 it had o be r tified by Congress. It. is still .-ending and G5 2QG hopes to be able to report that it It&S been carried t'.r -ugh by tho Spring of 1943 but fue latest report s wo that h feels that it .being held up by the-dilatoriness nd i ek of co-operation of the U.S. State Department.  He waa orking canwhile n t t Gersans Lcu-.d rean cent -eta. He disc vered th t their rlncipal friend wa no less th .n tnc President's, 80  brother-in-law Rafael ino Roca. On representations made by 05 200 and the FBI the U.S. Ambassador was actually moved so far as to complain to the President. The President offered to surrender a notorious Falangist the Spanish consul in Guayaquil if the Americans would leave Pino Roca alone but this was refused and the matter rested. During the absence of Mr. Long in the United States he was reolaeed by s men mono energetic diplomat called Hester 8. S. Charge d Affaires. In Moventer G5 200 intercepted and copied a number of letters between Pans a leading messber of 'the Has organisation and Hueff the German who remained In the Spanish legation to represent German interests. They proved absolutely unequivocally that Pino Roca and one Garbo Paredes Chief  f the Security Police in Guayaquil sere working with the Germans and tost Pino Roca was actually getting a monthly subsidy from then. Tula information ms passed by 3.0 Mew York to the State Department during the visit of the President to Americaj but no action was taken on it. It is no/ being pressed once sore. The President s brotherin- law is a big target but ala fall would cripple toe rosoninuer of the Mazi organisation in cuedor.  G5 .00 has also done a good deal to assist in blacklisting the lending Awls firms. His principal target La Provisors was not blacklisted chiefly for diplomatic reasons which he mv concedes to be partly valid He has also been hampered by ta slackness of tos O.S. Coanisrci&l Attache whose co-operation with to local S.F.W. representative is extwsely poor. The fact is that Washington seems to have decided that leuador is 0. S. te ritory and should be administered by the O'. S. alone. In these circumstanees the work done by G5 QG whiea would not have been dons if he had not been there either by nCR organissatioa or by the Americans is e highly creditable achievaaent.  . PERU. In Peru S.O. has had its only unfortunate experience. It is the most troubled country irs Letia America with an unstable econoisy   corrupt governing clique and an unhuppy orklnj-clsss represented Ysy a savagely auoproased popular party the APM. A Peruvian revolution is expected by the end of the war and probably during 1945., 81  The chief agent in Peru was G51Q0 who collaborated with his brother-in-law G5120. Tie latter himself a working sum is virtually a member of APM he is a trusted friend of its leader Haya d la Tore he knows Peru well and he is a man of h 3 hands extremely capable in any physical emergency -his r cord at the tralnin - school was one of the best ever -ad . But mentally he is leas alert and p rhaps trifle gullible. G5100 who ha never been trained is an older an with a certain mental instability in his family. Throughout the first six months of 1942 he sent more and more sensational stories to New fork and apparently disseminated them in Lima too. Some of them w r so alarming that they called for immediate action by the police the Army and even the U.3. forces. There w r complaints from the Britisi Legation which must be acknowledged to have be n justified. It was evident that G51Q0 was bringing discredit on S.G.L. in general and even on the British colony as a whole. We hid to asx him nd his colleague to give up their work for the organisation and to close it down completely so as to satisfy H.M.fu Thie agent was not the only gull sm investigation of the sources of his stories showed that some of them wer what might be called purely comrcrcial plants w lie others were political fabrications by /.PHA. Discreet eorreapcaidence with the P.B.I later proved that they too had been victims the same inventive Peruvian wuo forged letter and invented conversations for G510G or of kindred spirit the APRA canards continue to flutter the dovecotes of U.5. Military Intelliganoe there is one in full flight at the moment of writing and there have bean many cine G5100 retired. Their aim is to discredit the government by inventing dangers with which It cannot cepe and to break down the complacency of the democracies by threatening them with perile whose very vagueness makes them terrifying it must be added that the quality of treat Inventions is usually s oor as to confine the view held by the writer that APRA i a noble bat silly %  movement which in its ..resent shape will WMPMP succeed in seizing, 6 .  or holding power  nevertheless M-M rem&im the only /os.--ib e instrument for  S.O.L. to use in the event of a Japanese attack on Peru. A new agent GJ105 who was recently smt down to work on rart tine nd was instructed to join the Party and report on its plan has already turned in an excellent .jreliainary reports and we can look forward to having another line on this difficult but indispensable organization G5110 who is a journalist continues to feed the Peruvian press with rumours and news stories and occasionally informs on the most recent scandals in government circles. But apart from these sae-n .0 1 is virtually in abeyanc. in Peru., 95  F. CENTRAL AMERICA The six BrepublieBH of Central Merica from Ckiatemala to Panama are covered by 017 000 with his sub-agents 015 000 and 015 00 0 015 000 and 017 000 work together mainly in Costa Rica but 017 000 is constantly travelling throughout the territory. 015 000 works in Guatemala and Honduras. In one sense these men are most efficient agents. They keep the New York Office informed of ever topic of interest to SOI. They have contacts in almost every stratum of society. Their reports are models of precision snd good judgment. They have lived for many years in the territory and know the past history and character of nearly everyone of importance in it. One of them at least 017 000 is an exceptionally tough customer who has already been involved in a revolution or two and would look after both himself and British interests with great success in another he has a permanent interest in guerrilla tactics and has surveyed the whole territory from a peculiarly SO point of view. But since the Central American republics8 are a technically at war b not under direct Gena n threat and c being peacefully in vaded by the Americans there has not been a great deal for the agents to do. They have admitted this and have spent their first nine months in organising their files and records and in building up a remarkable series of naps and aerial photographs covering the entire peninsula. The Axis nationals throughout Central America were interned when war was declared or at least repatriated. Since many of the were well ensconced in the finances of one country or another and in the affections of its officials it has not always bean easy to keep them in order. 017 000 and 015 000 have therefore spent much effort on en suring that Germans in the various Central American countries should be hampered in their movements as much as possible on tracing evasions of  the black lists on pro osing candidates for interment and on other methods of harassing the enemy. 015 000 with several influential friends, 64  was at the end of 1942 engaged in pushing through the Costa  Rican parliament a new law which enables the Custodian of Alien  Property to expropriate at discretion the property not only of Axis  nationals but of native-born Costa Ricans of Axis parentage who have  hitherto because of their citizenship been exempt from such legis  lation. It is needless to point out the value of this law in loosening the hold of Germans on Central American property and trade. In other  Central American countries the same result is being achieved by the  cupidity of the Government by President Hjomoza in Nicaragua for  example j and G17 OO0 and his friends intend by appealing to the avarice of ouch men by enforcing the black lists by pressing for interment and deportation bv arousing public feeling against the  Axis a great deal of good was done by the submarine which bombarded  Liman in Costa Rica and by all other methods of indirect pressure to ensure that before the end of the war the German will have neither money nor national left in Central America.  G. ACT I CO For the same reasons as those outlined under Central America SO in Mexico has been quiescent. Its representative was connected with the C organization and since operation proper ware virtually im possible most of his work has been of the C type in parentheses it should be added that GS 500 has now been released by the 0 organiza tion alsos his health and other circumstances prevented him from being a fully active agent . It is scarcely to be expected that SOS will ever operate in Mexico except very indirectly. Has Americans consider It part of their general South Restern military problem they would certainly intervene at once if its territory vere threatened. It might have been desirable to use SO methods along the Caribbean coast but the increasing control of that sea by the Allied naval forces and the express refusal of the Admiralty ruled that out too. The most serious need in Mexico is for better and more positive propaganda a aubject on which a memorandum has already been sent to PW1., 65  B. BOLIVIA Bolivia is of little strategic iaport.-mce to KO except as a source of raw materials. The Security Scheme Is in full opera tion there. It is another troubled country like Perm serious strikes with some bloodshed broke out in December 1942 and are likely to recur. But the cost of building up and maintaining an organization In Bolivia under the watchful eye of the Good Neighbour would be greater than the returns. Nazi activities continue in the country end there have even been anti-Semitic outbreaks the German organization was never properly broken up but from the SO point of view the country is only an enormous mine and SOE can leave the U.S.A to be the pithaad police.  I. URUGUAY 012 000 who is responsible for this little republic sets both as an 30 man and as a member of C organization the country is no much one of our Allies and there have been so many spontaneous move ments against the Axis in it that SO operations are unlikely to be needed G12 000 has however done a good de&l of work in gathering intelligence from other countries through Uruguayan sources and in improving SO contacts with the Basques and other anti-Axis minority groups. Through  such groups ha has been conducting an Independent letter writing cam  paign aimed at disturbing or converting important Falangists in Spain  and Spanish territories. His personal influence is very great he has taken great care to have SO candidates elected wherever the result was in doubt he has done much to assist the progress of the Security Scheme  in Uruguay and altogether his character and his work have bean of  great though unsensational help to the cause.  J ARGENTINA  The Argentine Republic being the only South American country which maintains relations with the Axis and to which the U.S. is not effusively friendly appears to present the best opportunities for SOE action in Latin America. That none has actually been taken is due to several causes a the charter prohibiting straightforward SO operations   b the absence of a clearly defined Foreign Office policy towards, 66  Argentina e the peculiar political situation in which tho aass of the people are pro-Allied the army and police are pro-German and the most powerful Ministers are pro-Garraan neutrals d the character of representative G6 000  Throughout 1942 SO New lork continued to press for a stronger policy vis a vis the Argentine Goverment which despite its iupassive front is not impregnable which despite Its moneyed support has no real popular backing nd which despite its reliance on the army is unwilling to use force. The Foreign Office' declaration of December 1942 Is we believe at least oartially the result of the representa tions made by this office and it is oroposed to follow it up with still stronger pressure now that the Argentine administration feels itself isolated by the defection of Chile. In a sense therefore the work done by 011 000 in Chile has been aimed also at the Argentine.  Governed by an oligarchy with a history of electoral cor ruption Argentina could have been induced to change her policy only by large scale bribery araong the. governing class or a popular movement of overwhelming force. None of the various urchaseable politicians from Alberto Barcelo upwards appeared to b able to guarantee results and it looked as if General Juste were going to deliver without pay ment. A popular movement organised by foreigners would have had no chance of success. Few or none of the native radicals had the wisdom and energy to unite all the left-wing forces on one platform and per haps they were not convinced that it would be to their advantage to do so. An exceptional c0 man like 011 000 might conceivably have united and guided the left-wing forces in Argentina so as to break down the state of siege and force a rupture of relations with the Axis by some step so drastic as a general strike. But such men are hard to find and 06 000 was emphatically not one of them.  H is an orthodox Englishman rather too honest end straight forward to be SQ-mind d. He is anxious enough to do good but he will hardly invent or execute plans involving what he would consider underhand, 67  means to achieve the good. His chief activities therefore h ve  been minor. He has investigated and several times recommended for  blacklisting firms cooperating with the Axis. H has made a number of press contacts through which he has fed propaganda to fairly  important papers such as Critics and Accion Argentina and he has  maintained good contacts with the Basque colony through whom & lot of interesting intelligence is derived. Finally he has made a number of  useful political suggestions which have been passed on to London.  It was he who first proposed to SO to place an embargo on the Argentine  mast tr- de with B.K. and he has always recommended a good lively policy  of uropaganda from the Catholic point of view -a recommendation which still remains valid and .-.hould be acted upon. What is reeded in the  Argentine is an SO representative of considerable experience and in vention who would be as active on the SO side as the professional diplomat is neutral and at the same time possess a good deal of personal prestige. It is scarcely 06 000 s fault that he does not possess this remarkable combination of qualities. He has worked faithfully for SO without pay in the face of a good many difficulties and he deserves SOS s sincere gratitude  K. ySKSZUSLA Venezuela is still recovering from the cruel but profitable dictatorship of General Gomes. The secret police created by him highly paid and highly trained still dominate the country and it is impossible to act or even to exist without their sanction and cooperation. The  C representatives are in touch with them. They certainly know of the activities of OS 000 but he has been too discreet to call attention to himself and remains in the background. In addition the Venezuelan population was spiritually emas culated by the Gomez dictatorship it would be impossible to build up an SO organization with native sub-agents G'S 000 therefore uses members of the various minority groups notably the Basques the C.zechs and the Republican Spaniards who provide a good makeweight against, 88  Falangist aetivitisa and would cert' inly '.trht for the British canse as well ae their own if it ever became necessary. The German org.nlration never strong was a rSously injured by the departure of the diplomatic mission nd the repatriation of rerious German natlonale in the Spring Through pressure from G8 Q00 and repreeentetives of other agencies the powerful German firm of Biota and Company was included in the black list t-oi has bean losing ground steadily. The Standard Oil Company led by a pro-Irish isolationist aaneger persisted in employing three Germans one of tha at least in an Important posi tion After a whispering campaign failed to produce the desired re   ult G 000 organised a direct attack on these aen in the press questioning the right of Standard Oil to prejudice the nationsl integ rity of Venezuela. The ao wore dismissed next week as was also a GeriEK oaployee of Socony Vacuum. G8 000 has also watched ansi where possible exposed Falangist propaganda an activity in which his Republican and Basque contacts ure very useful. 1 hen Alberto Ravel a laft-wing Senator wag about to tmbliah his important report on Axis activities in Venessuela JS 0OO supplied both information and en couragement It should be remembered that he is not a full tia SO representatiy . His cover Is Shell Oil The main importance of Venezuela continues to be its oi fields. They are protected externally by the G.S. Amy and array air force and internally by the Security Scheme which represents the chief effort of SO in the territory., 69  5 Micorltlaa   i General. The United States of America with thirty or lore millions of its inhabitants of Central and Eastern European descent constitutes a peculiar link with Europe. These immigrants and their descendants left Europe bec-mse they were hungry or oppressed there. They found in the new country freedom and material well-being. Psychologically they were not willing to be entangled again in European affairs. At the same time a deep affection for the Mother Country remained in the hearts of these people. These two oppressing elements created a particularly delicate and difficult situation. On the other hand the war brought to the shores of the U.S.A. and particularly to New York and to Chicago leaders and prominent figures from all European countries which were overrun by the Nazis. This political emigration made th& United States a uni ue centre for the political organization of the resistance movement in Europe with which it continued its contacts. Although removed by thousands of miles of ocean. Hew York and Chicago remain the unquestionable centres of anti-Ha i activities outf.ide Europe. The more so as all contacts with European national minorities and European political refugees in Central nd South Americas west through New York.  This situation laid down the first and main objective of this Section viz to Initiate and develop contacts with the national minorities to cultivate contacts with the leaders of the various resistance movements. It was only through these channels that reliable recruits could be found for infiltration into Europe because men who are well-known to their political friends and what is lore who are experienced in underground work were obviously the most desirable candidate .  The great majority of Americans of European descent belonged to the working class. A considerable number of them were still tech nically aliens but they were all members of working class organizations., 70  Thus tha political cliia&t of these organizations and in par ticular of the two most powerful of then -The Associated Federation of Labour and the Congress of Industrial Organizations -required also  imodi&te attention. In the beginning of 1941 when the Section started its work isolationist tendencies were still vary strong and up to Germany a attack on Russia in June it may even be said that they pre vailed. Two sowerful groups one united by national the other by historical ties stood out among the isolationists the Irlsh-Americans and the American Legion. The Section also had to deal with them.  Apart from searching for and finding personal contacts with leading members of national groups the Section tried to consolidate the result of its work byt a supporting in each n&tionnl group such elements who were considered most favourable for the purpose of organ izing recruits and b by helping them to eliminate Nasi influence and t fight sabotage tendencies.  At the same time certain activities had to be modified or adjusted to the changing circumstances. Thus Recruiting which has recently been transferred to a separate section had to be restricted to Canada as any independent recruiting in the 0.3.A. is now forbidden. At toe same tiae the Section's excellent contacts with the emigre groups allowed them to find suitable elements whom they are passing on to OSS. Recruiting through OSS is however getting increasingly difficult in view of the obstruction of the State Department in -jiving passports or exit and re-entry permits.  Particular attention has been paid to contacts with continental groups-which still have connections with underground movements in Europe. Although these connections become naturally less and less regular still certain elements continue to have them viz the Basque the French Syndicalists toe people around toe American-Jewish Labour Cora.littee theMazainiSocietyand the correspond .ggroupsinMexico and Buenos Aires It may be said that there is hardly one group of any influence which could not b contacted or called upon if necessary., 71  All these groups sr extremely anxious to have access to British organizations as they are getting either resentful of American patronage or keep shy of the American officials who often have in  sufficient experience of the luropean psychology.  A particular feature of this Section's work has bean the close collaboration with the Embassy in Washington. At present all political questions arising in connection with the European groups are regularly discussed with the Embassy which receives all relevant reports from SO and which readily passes on the instructions end. the information they receive on European flatters. Sir Bonald Campbell has been constantly both interested in our work and helpful. Inquiries are nor repeatedly received from the Embassy for Informa tion. As a result the possibility of conflicting views going to London from SO and from Washington has practically corse to an end.  Apart from the Embassy other British Offices via British Information Services and British Political Warfare Mission are con stantly applying to the Section for information and It gladly collabor ates with them so far as possible.  A very large part of the Section a activities are taken up by the collaboration with OSS. The very large and growing Foreign Rationalities Branch which has also direct access to the State Depart ment is greatly relying on SO Hew York and Is not only exchanging its material but also regularly consulting with this Section. On the German side SO influence had. some valuable practical results as the Section was instrumental in restricting the original ehthusissa to employ as many German refugees as possible. As the Minorities questions in OSS are also extensively dealt with by the C section of OSS this Section is in daily contact with them also.   ii Groupa  a The Section encouraged and. used the work of the Mazslnl Society which represents the moat active anti-Fascist element among the Italians., 78. It fought the powerful Pascist-Italiss. press cjerierose Pope . It explored th possibility of obtaining recruits and carried out various particular aeslgments us instructed by London -e.g. Mission of  E. Lussu mission to the prisoners of war in India etc. Free Italian organisations were started in Argentina and Brasil where Members of the Maasini Society sere sent by 0. Italian sections of workln  aon organisations particularly in New England and in tha Middle Seat were successfully penetrated Mazalnl Sews a weekly bulletin which afterwards developed into a weakly paper Nasioni Unit was subsidized and encouraged. Activity anti movement of Mazsini leaders was facilitated by G with the U.S. authorities and enabled many anti-Fasciet lectures to b held by them Th main conclusive service rendered by the Section recently was the coaching of Prim for his conversations with the State De partment which culminated in a declaration of policy towards Italy which was made finally by Mr. A. Berle solely as a result of Priaa'e conversations. This declaration ha given new impetus to independent underground work carried on by Italian group . The Section was directly instrumental in arranging that Berle s declaration was re ferred to the Embassy prior to Its delivery.  The Section has further been engaged in helping the Maszlni Society aaintsin friendly relations with OSS to encourage them to continue their representative work. Through personal contact with the M&zzin work the Section poccssses direct links with the Italian Labour Committee Italian Socialist Party and tha Italian Republicans.  Special contact wag maintained through th Maz-sinl Society with Count Sfcrsa at th time of the Montevideo conference. Activities of various Italian groups la Centr.1 and South America have bean studied and information obtained from agents in Latin America.   b FRENCH Close contact was kept with the Free French and with th various groups who although they did not join th Free French were associated with resistance organizations in France. Th French  Socialist group France Speaksl and tho Catholic Trade Unionist have been particularly helpful, 75. The Worth African situation has naturally considerably complicated the French situation and the section is now trying to establish closer relations also with the various Qiraud laissiona. particularly in order to follow the anti-British tendencies which are manifest in certain of their erab rs.   c HUNGARIANS. Early in 1940 the situation among the Araerican-Hungariane was extremely unsatisfactory -the major Hungarian organization The American-Hung. ri n Federation -being controlled by open or crypto- Fascists.  The democratic elements were weak nd had no leadership.   Hie Hungarian press was practically controlled by the Hungarian Lega tion. To look for recruits who were badly wanted seemed pretty hope less. This flection started a news bulletin- Igazsaon&o0 which success fully fought against a storm of opposition and vituperation in favour of a definite break with llorthy and his crowd. It fought Eekhardt who was considered to be acting in the interest of the Budapest Government. The Section is grateful for the encouragement Igasaondo found in London and was sorry to let it go as part of the policy it had to adopt after Pearl Harbour  Nevertheless Eckhardt was finally -islodged. The Araericsn- Hungarlan Federation come out with an anti-Nazi declaration. A few Hungarian recruits were found and several others are under consideration.  In this -as in other matters -the Section was con mite'1 by the British Embassy concerning the question of the recognition of a Hungarian Free Movement.  Due to the fact that there are so few Hungarians of ary merit or importance in this country and the restriction of the Section s functions subsequent to Pearl Harbour activity among Hungarians has been somewhat curtailed. It has been found imprudent to establish any close association with Professor Varabery as he is an inveterate gossip.  Tibor Eckhardt has proved equally unreliable and evidently unwilling to speak other than on lines which it is felt were carefully, 74  thought ont and rehearsed. The rest f the Hungarian eiaigrse who run th Hungarian language newspapers intrigue in the American Hungarian Federation and dabble In Hungarian politics are for the most oart unregenerate ro-Horthyists fascist at heart reactionary and irredentist. The priority are of Jewish origin but anomalously a.nil-Somite. Mired in with these are tho-e of a pro Hab burg orienta  tion among which can be counted Eekhardt All but the Vambery group  are virtually anti-Cssch and to thorn Banes is incomparaMy worse than  Hitler.  Hie Section of the State Department responsible for minority work has found the Hungarian emigres impossible to control or lead into constructive paths although certain members of this Section seemed inclined to encourage the reactionary elements. The main obstacle to progress is the American Hungarian Federation which is still unoficielly under the patronage of the Hungarian Government. However in June 194 contact was established with Antal Balasy former Secretary of the Hungarian Legation in Washington with several interesting and productive results. It was at SO s instigation that Relasy resigned from th Fckhfirdt Committee which soon after precipitated Ickhardt s own resignation and the subsequent dissolution of his Independent Hungarian Movement. Balasy despite his spotless political record integrity and intelligence is not cut out to be a leader life is respected and ad mired by the few Democratic Hungarians here although Vwabery was disinclined to trust him and has been encouraged by SO to greater activity for the Hungarian cause. A movement was started to try to substitute Balasy for Eckhardt but this was quashed amidst a play of bitter verbal cynicism at a meeting of the Hungarian Federation.  At present the Hungarlsn scene with th somewhat flashy Eckhardt at present in the background is becoming increasingly parochial. However there are rumours that lekhardt supported by his friends in the State Department may come to the front again. The Section is of, 75. course watching carefully for all possible developments of this situation.   d UKRAINIANS The Ukrainian population in the United States of America . has been for the past fifteen years under the distinct influence of Nasi-directed organisations. The G organisation contacted the  only non-Coaraunlst Democratic body -The Defense of the Ukraine fhich it was thought might be useful and for a short time subsidised a bi-weekly bulletin Gromadsky Galas . The group has pood contacts with the Ukrainians in Canada and in South America and powerfully helped by the influence of America a entry into the war is making pod progress in destroying the German influences.  A renewal of activity among the Ukrainian Nationalists who are connected with organisations which up to Pearl Harbour were known to be controlled by the Germans and the strange Polish-Ukrainian con versations have come to the Section s knowledge. As a result the Section informed OSS and the Department of Justice are now Investicatr  i ing them.   e IUGOSIiAVS The Section started its work by assisting the fight against the Paveliteh groups among the Croats It was instrumental in killing the influence of Ante Doshan and collected evidence against him for the American authorities. Hie Section subsidized the ublleatlon of the  Slavonic Bulletin and of Hove Yugoslavia and through these Tublicatlons came into contact with element from which recruits for Europe were obtained.  It contacted the various Yugoslav Ministers now in the U.K.A. particularly with a view of smoothing down the difficulties which arose between the Serbs and Croats. There again the Section found support from the Embassies and the Miniform Services.  Very active contacts have been continued with all the leading personalities of the Yugoslav scene and a special study of the Croat Separatists has been carried out via Vilhar in South America., 76  Aajr stueoesa which has been achieved In counteracting Fotlc s Greater Serbian Aggression policy by the American Authorities is to a great extant due to this Section.   f CZBCHO-SiOVAXSi The Section works in close contact with the Csecho-Slovak Secret Services am obtains valuable information from them. It was instrumental in assisting the non-re-election of the separatist members of the Board of Directors of the Slovak Federation In August 1341. It has been following the activities of Dr. Hodza and the attempt to form a SIovak-Horthy-Habsburg bloc.,  g ruLi-S Th Section works In close coni at with the Polish Secret Strvices. It also contacts the useful group of Polish Socialists composed f recent refugees from Poland .-they support the Sikorski Governisent are on better terms ith the Russian than the other Polish groups and v luabl contact with their comrades in Poland. Information is exchanged conc ming Poles in the U.S. and in South America. The Section is also the only contact with the special division which controls Polish agents in S'nth America All reports from these agents are passed to .0. and the contents used by this Section or passed to G.I. section. S.O. also are in contact with the Polish Socialist Group .-md the Social Democrats Pollsto-Jswish Bund . The activities of the representatives of the night opposition to the Sikorski Government are closely followed.  Poland's relations with Russia and the various negotiations which take place between Poles and representatives of lugor.lavia and Czechoslovakia said some Baltic States the continuing estrangement between Poland and Czechoslovakia the discussions between the Poles and Slovak Croats .nd Hun arians --all these questions hav constantly engaged the Section's attention.  . h DULGAKIAMS. The Section as instructed contacted Todoroff and Stoyanoff and arranged for their iespateh to Cairo. It has now under consideration a number of Bulgarian recruits found by Todoroff in Canada   i RGUidutfAaS. Section was busy in. count .r. cting the pro- Carolist group. It was in contact with & number of ro-Allied Roumanians with Davila at the head and has established contacts in South America through which it expects to get further news about Maniu and his group. It has been throughout in close touch with the British Embassy on these matters. During the year 1942-43 the section kept in close touch with Roumanian groups in this country. In the summer md autumn of 1942 considerable activity centered round th p rson of Aora with whom the Section maintained friendly relations Zora is the only Roumanian 1c der of importance ana he has behaved with great can our towards S.O. and kept S.O. fully informed of his various negotiations with the State, 78. Departmenfe and courersatims ifch Mr. Litviaoff. Through & series of jRisunderstsndings Zora had fallen into poor repute with the-State Bep&rtsaat and also the Embassy. S.O. How fork succeed i in clearing up these adsuaderstandlnge on both sides and it was ossibly unfortunate that the Section s first efforts to consolidate Zor&'s position by contri ing that he pay a short unofficial visit to ingland were frustrated by the Foreign Office. Des lie the good view that was then being taken of hi it seems now that until the State Beparfensnt and the Foreign Office decide finally upon an official policy with regard to Rctutanla no progress can be made in the formation of an actual Free Roumanian Movement or the activities of its Mw uld-beB leaders. 2ora is howev r holding himself in readiness should ny cieeision be mde or should he be called upon and it is considered of the utmost importance to aaintain the contact on the basis on which it has hitherto rested as Zora has always been Killing to take a directive from S.G.iu and to keep the New fork Of ice informed upon his Washington conversations. S.O. efforts in squashing Carol s Roumanian Movement headed in this country by the Roumanian priests Moraru and Opreanu w i r completely successful ending with the arrest of the priests and the Uabandonment of the entire Eovereent in this country and the cessation of their propaganda publications The Free Roumanian and the Glasul Roaanul together with a caution to cease activities on behalf of Carol delivered by the Canadian Bspartment of External Affairs to Carol Canadian l&wyer Blowafioid Strong representations hav been ande to the Embassy on each occasion Carol attempted to enter this country and every effort has been made to dispel the illusion that the British Gcrerniaent in any way looks favourably upon Carol. The danger may not have eonpletely abated and  S.O. New fork la keeping itself fully informed on all his movements through intercepts and the Section's contacts both here snl in Mexico. . In the meantime friendly contacts have been developed with other prominent democratic Roumanians and A. erlcan-Boum&ni&ns in Washington and, 79  elsewhere. The situation of hi 'in ritj group la however at the moment quiescent.   j GRiii'vS. Contacts have been nude with Venizelos and anti- Uetaxa Greeks. The Sect ton was engaged in counteracting anti-British intrigues which emanate fros certain Greek iemertc. The contacts with the Greeks have been continued and the various .uiti-British intrigues here closely followed.   k lITHU/illfeii. The Section taaintained contact with various potential leaders and exerted its influence in reconciling in one committee the opposiiq national groups -with e. view of eliminating the influence of the pro-German bmetona group. Personal contact exists with anti-Nazi Lithuanians in particular Colonel Qrinius President of the Lithuanian Mational Council. Through thes conteets the section sept informed about pro-German Lithuanian clericals in thi country .id articularly South America. S.0.1. is similarly informed of pol tie&l approaches mde to the Lithuanians by other nationals Baltic or Polish.   l FlilNS. The Section maintained clone contact with nd encouraged the reeist-nce of the pro-Democrotic nationals nht. are opposed to the Nazi tone of the official representation. The Section maintains touch ith leading independent Finns and is kept informed on the riv u. activities of he pro-Fascist and anti-Faseist political elements. The Section is also kept informed on current matters which may also be of interest to H.L.G. -e.g. troubles with Finnish seamen.   o SCav.. Ih Vii.i.f Ci.ose contact was established with those in charge of Danish and Norwegian Free groups. S.O.E. is kept fully informed on the cautious journey along a strictly neutral path of liferent Swedish elements. Continuous private contact is maintained with the Danish liinister who is considered the moral leader of the Free Danes in the Western Hemisphere. The Section's advice is frequently helpful to him in dealing with such general subjects as the attitude of the Free Danes to the war effort in, 80. the U.S.A. and the assistance given to young Danes to join H.M. forces in some capacity recently tht visit of Christisas Mollor to the U.S.A. and Canada wa.. a success due in part to the Section s indirect instructions regarding the attitude he should adopt here. This Section is in regular touch with the Danish Bureau for release of press items and propaganda.  The ir&in function in connection with the horeegi-on group has been the mintenaace of contact vfith their Intelligence Service. 1' th s way  S.O.E. has be n able to provide S.O. agents in South America with information on Horwegl&n nationals in their area. The Section fans further kept in touch with th office which has been recruiting in New York for the special national .unit in the U.S. aragr and with the Information Bureau which not only istributea press releases but reflects the activities of all national groups in this c untry.   n SPANISH. As Spanish recruits were not required and the Falange activities were studies by S.I.S. tbi Section restricted itself to keeping in contact with prominrnt aolards of various groups Republicans Basques Monarchists. The Section is engaged in preparing to mobilize the facilities w ieh exist in Me ico and in Bueno -Aires in ord-r to find through its Spanish friends recruits among tiu former non-Spanish iwafcers of tht Foreign Spanish Legion. An important plan to this effect is in preparation for Mexico where th auspices appear to be favourable. The Section wa.J also interested with the assistance to be given to Steven and Marshall -'ho were here on .. eeial mission. The Section has been fortunate in establishing v ry confident and friendly relation with Dr. Aguirre and the Basque le.ders. Whereas the Basques formerly demanded certain political concessions as a consideration for their collaboration i ey have desisted from doing - o so far as S.O. is concerned. There is no doubt that in the matter of m underground  grapevine with the Southern European countries the Basque organization has no rivals in the U.S.A.   o AUSTRIANS. The Section's contacts were with the non-party anti-legitimist  Austrian Action and .1th the Austrian Soeialiats Austrian Action has been for a time ubsidized by S.O.E,  1.   /  It waa also responsible for counteracting the rumour that the H&psburg restoration m-favoured by H.M.G & rumour which cauf-ed consider able disturbiince to the U.S authorities.  The cost significant event in Austr-in affair in the United States during the past year has been the formation of the Austrian Leg 'on nd the Austrian Military Committee headed by Otto von H&psburg The Section had during the previous months received from its Austrian friends secret Inforra&ion that the consideration of such a plan by the State.Department was in progress but upon informing the American Embassy and upon the Embassy requesting information on this score from the State Department they received the assurance that no such step would be considered by the War Department without their consulting the State Department and that the State Department w uld in their turn naturally inform the Embassy. This assurance was not valid and the news of the formation of a Hapsburg Legion came as a boffib-shsll . Moreover the War Office announced that the State Department had been consulted and that the action war. undertaken with their approval.  Fortunately the existence of Austrian Action founded and subsidized by S.G and later helped by O.S.S. gave th opportunity for organising an eloquent and violent opposition. The friends f Austrian Action immediately flooded th newspapers ith letters of protest they personally visited columnists and radio commentatorsi and explained the danger of this political blunder. The radio and the press responded with strongly worded c nderr ation of this action of their War Department and the State Department.  The Section h&s also been in constant touch with the Austrian Labour group whose attitude towards any -. Ian of Hapsburg restoration was naturally very negative-. Out of the Austrian Socialists the most active one in the U.S.A. is Julius Deutech who is always ready to collaborate with the British.  In the meantime eloe touch was maintained with the trends Mid activities of the various Austrian groups in South and Central America and in Canada. S.G New York was forced t one time to make unofficial  represent tions to the C.nddian Government with regard to the Activities, 88  of Austrian repr sentativ--s resident in Gm&da. whose action.' and words were considereci by 8.0. Sew lork to be nothing sh rt of subrersire. The sectim was successful in brii gin their activities under control.  With regard to Austrian recruits the section had assembled twentyfive before this work was taken vcr by O.S.8. The recruits were then passed on to the   p QkfeUiS. The Section had to ab ndm its former msrire attitude & regards this group which has become extrawely active sad whoa influence on Arnriem public opinion is increasing. The Section has been busy in building up ano developing new contacts direct and indirect with prominent Gormans Bruening Treviranus Paul Scheffer the South German Catholics the various shades f Socialists etc.  q PUSwiAbS Since the attack on Russia S.0.1. abandoned aost of the Kussian contacts as the dwindling minority of Whit -Russians who ret edited loyal to the Gontans c aid easily bo handled by the police. S.O.E. had no Russian eoruits to look for S.O. purposes and. activity was restricted to politics intelligence concerning the attitude of the representatives of the Soviet Government Latterly information about Russia s political asplr tlons and the re ciion-to them of .uEsia neighb ure and of the U.S.A. Administrstic and public opinion has been collected. The Section succeeded not without  difficulties in establishing regular courses f information with the Russian kibassy unci Lend-Lease and fcilitary Missicais. It is hoped that these sources 111 continue to yield valuable information.   iii Soutii A. erica. The Section considers that S.O. work among the  .inorifcics - a the Yugoslav in Chile b the Poles in Brazil c the Italians and S aniards in Argentina d the Spaniards and menbers of the International Brigade in Mexico indicating only the aor important groups is of groat iamedlater and practical importance. This work has to be planned from. Hew York which remains the centre -f foreign national aspirations and where the or roaintnt 1 adore are concentrated.  .0.1 . has agreed with the Canadian Authorities to extend the Section's worts to Canada. The foreign groups in Canada present the-asme problems as they do in the U.S.A. They usually are grouped in organizations, 85  wh .ch are eithtr of a larger Aioerieaa oi g .iiieation or are perp eated with the sa ..'-inciples. The Ukrainians present artieuiarly a question in point.   iv Labour. The Section took an interest in contacts with the Labour rnovtment in view of the large influence of isolationist tendencies and of the danger of wide-scale sabotage activities. Since December 1941 this is no longer S.O.E s work but the contacts which have be n developed in the C.l.G. and the A.F. of L. and among Influential labour journalists aad trade union leaders remain valuable and the Lection uses them i.e. -for the passing on of information on British Labour questions which are constantly in demand   v Iri-ah Arcricacs. The Section has also prepared detailed reports on the Irish-Arerieen question c.nd was responsible for the activity of the anti-isolationist League to Defend Ireland1 . Unfortun tely the work had also to be dropped after Pearl Harbour.  vi kecent Developments. America's entry into the war .rid S.O.E.'s association with Col. Donovan has considerably altered methods of working without modifying in -ny substantial manner the pur. oses thereof. The Section had to drop its direct .-.ctivities insofar as they were conducted by its agents. But it was successful In having all its agents accepted and taken over by the Office of Strategic Services to work with them and v.hose instructions are prepa ed in consulation with this Section. Owing to Col. Donovan's position in the U.S.A Administration it is thus possible to have S.G.E.'s ideas accepted and carried out by the Administration to which they are submitted by the Colonel  For examples    a G's anxieties as to Tiber Eckhardt's role have been shared by Col. Donov n and notwithstanding the support which Eckbardt had from several influential members of the U.S. St te Department S.O.E. finally succeeded in getting the Americans to abandon the Idea of n official support for his Movement., 84   b G was able through Colonel Donovan to persuade Mr Sumer Welles to taKe up fch uesfelon of he toerb agitation against the Croats.  c G succeeded through Colonel Donovan in getting the War Department to agree to include non-resident aliens in the application of the Selective Draft act if o requested by Colonel Donovan which mean that persons coring into the U.S.A. illegally or residing here illegally can be accepted as S.O recruits. The Section is in day-to-day contact with the S.O. Foreign Nationalities Research and Analysis Sections of Colonel Donovan s organization and thr -ugh them with other departments which are engaged in similar activities and the ork is proceeding in perfect and absolute hajsaomy.  The Director of Q.S.S. continues to us G specialists in recruiting and as agreed is passing to him all its recruits in the U.S.A. and such of its recruits in Canada and South America as it is considered necessary.  Although Colonel Donovan has been able to introduce his officers at their request to its various' contacts among the praminant leaders of national nd refugee groups O.S.S. is naturally continuing and developing its own contacts in this direction being still convinced that a close cont ct with Free Movements is important for keeping live in enemyoccupied countri.es & spirit of resistance and for th-er.c ur&gerent of civil disobedience or acts of sabotage calculated to hinder German military and economic interests should n t be under-estimated.  In order to keep in closest touch itb th trends and developments of Administrative activity and policy the Section has direct personal contact with one cabinet minister and indirect contact with a few leading officials in Important Government Departments  The development of the war is bringing the European question more and more to the forefront. All emigre groups in which are included the mis ions of the Govemmcnts-in-exile discuss feverishly questions of post war settlement accordingly the American activity inside the European groups has also recently derably increased. The American Autb ritles are now continually contacting all the European group in order as they, 35  put it to ascertain the trend .f political aspirations prevailing in the respective groups but also in order to press upon the the official American view on the best solution of ih respective problems.  The gr ups which are contacted include official and unofficial representatives the various GovernEents-in-exile etc. prominent refugees who have a certain political following and leadin representatives of purely American groups of European origin. Thus Count Sfcrza for the Italians Dr. Hodsa fe. the Slovaks Tiber Eckh&rdt for the Hungarians Archduke Otto for the Austrians Br. Bruning nd Terviranus for the Germans Ban Subasic Kossanovic an SnoJ for the Yugoslavs are in constant touch with various official Americans to speak only of the refugees.  Recently It has come to 8.0 3 knowledge that thee. and similar contacts are going t be intensified by moan of a -eclal unofficial body to be established in U .w York This body will act as kind f research group of'the Office of Str&.tegie Services but will in fact be under the control of Mr. A. Berle to whom it will report.  The Americana think they met enlist th support of the European groups here for their peace policy. They antlcipat the differences which In their opinion must arise between U.S.A. and Ingland. Apart from the divergent views on France the Americans think that Britain may be prepared or r&ay be forced to .axe greater concessions to the U.S.S.R. than the U.S.A. Govern ent is .repared to see. The Soviet bogey is very present in the minds of such responsible people &s Mr. Berle Admiral I ahy and many others. At the sa e time there is a general t ndency to preswee-that the U.S.A is in a position to achieve mere in Europe in view of her allegedly great r prestige. One hears constantly the assertion ev n from one s own friends that in Europe the population prefers the Am ricans to the Bltish and that it is therefore better to act through American .gents and mor expedient to put forward a olicy which is known to be an American policy.  Whatever the various motives may be on fact is well est&bllshedt Constant conversations on peace berms are no conducted by American officials, 801 with all European groups iarg. and small important.and Insignificant with Italians Latvians Albanians and Germans. Two points about these  conversations are of interest   a The question of Eastern Europe and f the Western frontier f Russia seems always to be in the fore front  b In each national unit the group usually chosen for conversation appears to be the most conservative group. It is sub itted that .fullest information about the various American ov s in this direction is essential and that & close contact with European groups for the purpose of fiseert&inin the current trends prevailing is iis ortant. These contacts may -Iso enable S.L when necessary to put forward the British points of view so far as they are cryat&ilized and embodied in definite directives. This Section has developed extensively its unofficial contact with the Canadian Government from whoa it receives & great uaasure of assistance and cooperation. The Canadian Authorities provide confidential reports on all Minority group or active political exiles which tie in with the Section's work in this country. Reciprocally the Section sends' to the Canadians its reports notably on French German Austrian Yugoslav Czech Italian Polish Okrainim and Scandinavian matters. The Section has achieved ome success in obtaining action to curb the undesirable activities of Otto Strasser. S.O. s suggestions in respect of this and other political exiles have been accepted -nd acted upon. furthermore the Canadians give S.O. Sew York the faxiraua assistance in natters concerning recruiting which includes obtaining releases from the Canadian Ars rj the issuance of false passportss the provision of foreign clothing fro internment asmps. A great deal of time is willingly spent on behalf of S.O. by two or three leading officials in certain Canadian Government Departments on  S.G.E. work connected with this Section.  vli Future Possibilities. British interest in the Rational minorities and the Free Movements is incomparably greater than that of the  O.S.A. Great Britain is and remains a European power an is directly and ir mediately dependent on the conditions of the Continent of Europe, 87  whereas he U.5 . has the choice between an active participation in European affairs or a gradual withdrawal from Europe as she did after  the first ftorld War. In the svords of Vernon Bartlett Only if we in Britain could be completely indifferent to a Continent completely under 6cman control could we afford to neglect development in Central Eastern- Europe .  By force f circumstances the great ajority of political leaders of th Euro ean countries who were able to escape from the Germans are now in the Americas .Taialy in the U.S.A. but also in Latin-America and Canada. They are the people who are closely connected with the various resistance movements in the home countries. They are the organizers of various Free Movements or other groups .tech rally the antl-4iazi elements in ach racial unit. It is the task of S.O.E. to be in close contact with them to study their desiderata to assist them to lead them in the erection of our olicies to work for stronger unity within each such group.  Th European countries in the persons of their best r resentatives look to England and notwithstanding all t . ables about Perfide Albion they trust England. They trust her more than they do Russia sore than they do the United States. The elements f social revolution inherent in the Russian situation frightens them the post-war olicy of the United States does n t inspire confidence. All these countries and people look up to England for leadershipj they expect it and demand it. They are only too willin to rally round England in the settlement of post-war problems. A great opportunity is thus open to S.O.E. and it will depend an S.O.E. s policy whether it is seized or thrown away., 88  Intel'iis eace and Plstming.  'Ehe Ist0lliger.ce Section mm formed in November 1941 for the purpose of collating intelligence and drawing up plan for SO operation in Latin America. It was decided that for th sake of convenience th G.I. should snasaariK all th intelligence relevant to its purposes in files and o rd-indexee to be .kept at the Section a disposal. This was a task of considerable magnitude and necessitated reading many files in th offices of Security Co-Ordination analysing the Information contained therein and classifying it under the headings of various agents political personalities organizations etc. in Latin America. Since this material hen been completed it has been the aim of the G.I. Section to keep it thoroughly up-to-date. All information concerning Latin American countries that has passed through tha hands of G.I. has been digested and recorded. While this information wan being collected various r chsn fi for SO action in South Anerica were suggested ansi discussed with -ho British Embassy in Washington. However it soon bacaae apparent that the State Department was disquieted by the whole prospect of SO activities In Latin America. The uneasiness sprang from the opinion widely held in the U.S A. that Latin America was largely a responsi bility of 'their own and that any outside interference was calculated to upyet their plans. The G. Organization on th other hand held that the State Department was ignorant of the dangers that threatened South America and feared that it might also persuade the British Foreign Office that conditions in Latin America were entirely satis factory.  On th realiaation that SO operations wer at least tem porarily suspended it bees the aim of G.I. to improve and extend its intelligence and its knowledge of conditions within the countries in which SO had contemplated operations. Thus should active opera tions ever be called for the material for their planning would bo at hand. At the sa time it was agreed that as SO in South America way temporarily In abeyance and as an officiant SO organization had already been built up throughout the territory the various regions sections, 89. could be used to good effect by providing intelligence while at the same time perfecting lines of conaunication etc. vithln the countries. They had in fact already proved themselves so useful that It was considered worthwhile to continue G.X. Section as an integral part of the G Organization confining its activities to the collation of tb .3 intelligence and turning it to the best possible use within the limits f its present charter.  It would not however bt correct to consider G.I. as merely  a collator -f intelligence received from its representatives In the field sine part of its duties has been to supply these representatives 1th any intelligence that could be obtained from sources other than those local  sources with which they were already in contact. Thus any reports frosi. Censorship nd ether sources have been seat down to the field. The intelligence collected by this Section has also been turned to use by those responsible for Economic Warfare and in om cases   e.g. in the case of fllohm ana Company Venezuela it is believed that intelligence provided as proved to be the final charge that placed the firr. on the Black List. Also asany reports have been sent via S.I.S. to the F.B.I. who found these reports extremely useful and requested their continuation. These reports have be n sent to London. They consist of extensive surveys of conditions la the-various Latin American countries covered from as many ingles as possible -trade politics strategy espionage etc. The Section Is also responsible for various special reports such as that on Japanese activities in various South American c entries which was written sad handed to the Japanese Section for t ansaission to London. Similarly an appreciation of the vital raw materials situation in South America was especially prepared with the help of the Sect on. This is an analysis of the extent to uich the Allies are dependent on Latin American sources for supplies of vital raw materials with 'articular attention to the possibilities of sabotage to these materials by the enemy.  Worki Operations being forbidden most of this Section's work is concerned with what might be ealle indirect ope.aliens and intelligence. Throughout 1942 it was building up files an card-indexes on personalities.  ', eo.  gr U 8 and targets in Latin America and it now has thirty or fortythousand names carded in some detail ae well as a large library of files reports hooks maps and photographs. It is fair to say that the HCn organization whieh has be. n operating jruch louder and has & meh larger staff has a wider range of information but much less detailed knowledge than .0 1. on all topics within its n e. About a hundred and fifty  sports have been sent to S.O. London during the year anti many to other organisations. Lvery week & summary of Latin American intelligence to be cabled to London by G. is prepared. This is use . as the basis of - h Intelligence Summary circulated by C organisation. In general 1942 was the year in which the sp-de-worse was done the main personalities were identified and the c - -r eter not only of political out of geographical groups in Latin Aperies was worked out.  5. Hesraiyagi. 0  During the year 1942 considerable activity in recruiting was carried on particularly amongst Jugoslav ana Italian minority groups. Contacts were rad particularly in Canada -ith several of the progressive Jugoslav and Italian groups and a number of recruits shewn in the table below have been recruited arid forwarded to their operational bases  1. Group of tea Jugoslavs end two Greeks recruited in the U.S.A. two Greeks and two Jugoslavs sent to Cairo eight Jugoslavs sent t Ingland. 2. Group of eight Jugoslavs recruited in Canada sent to Cairo. Only five of these reached Cairo as the boat was torpedoed two killed and one returned to Canada seriously ounded. 3. One Jugoslav recruited in Canada sent to Cairo. 4. Group of eight Jugoslavs recruited in Canada sent to Cairo. 5. Group of four Jugoslavs recruited in Canada sent to Cairo. 6. One Syrian' -ecruited in the U.S.A. sent to C iro. Close contact on recruiting is kept 1th the H.C.M.P. and the Canadian Military Authorities through both of which suitablt fields for recruiting h&v developed.  During the tried s considerable change took place in the organisation of recruiting In this office snd s ecru.ting is now a separate Section of S.G, 91  In view of the need for continuity in oerulting operations i.e. contact recruiting training -.nd tr nsj ort to the field base of operations the resent systc offers advantages that do n t need to be str ssed.  During the period London's requirements for para-military recruits also have offered an adr triable method eoobining ider recruiting with the necessary security and recruits are no generally passed through a paraodlitary course before the real object of their ork is rev aled tc them so tint sh uld the recruit under close observation show signs of being unsuitable his knowledge of the under-cover aspects of his work are so lia ted that he is not in a position to disclose Information of value if rejected  Machinery has been set up whereby the Canadian Military Authorities ..he throughout have been nost helpful. 111 now recruit into the ranks pf tho Canadian Array suitab n designated b 0 rocr d.ting service and after preliminary trainin these men are then transferred to the British Army for use as S.O. under-cover agents or as S.O para military agents. Close liaison in recruiting matters has been maintained between  .0. and S.I. with results advantageous to both.  The-fieeruiting Section al o carries on liaison in the Rew York Office with S.T.S.10.- and thrt gh this close liaison most satisfactory relations n . exist on all setters relating to training q.v  Liai. on in recruiting natters ith Colon-.1 Donovan's org isation has also been naintair.ed alth -u. b duritig the period under review recruiting by G.S.S. has been v ry limited. Rtcent developments indicate a desire on Colonel Donovan's part to re-start.recruiting ur.d it is likely that his orga isation will be closely as elated .ith S.O. While the Canadian field is limited there arc still considerable numbers of potential recruits to be found and in articular Joes this apply to the jra-ilitar recruiting referred to above. Much however must depend  on long term policy. Potential fields for ecruitin exist arongst It-.ian . md Jugoslav minorities in South America w ich h ve n t as y t bean touched.  During th period recruiting was carried on by D/H2 until bis, 92  aeparture In August 1942 since when G.440 has combined this with other duties as liaison officer with S.T.S. 10.  6. Training. The question of special training was' discussed in July 1941 during G s risit to London At that time a site in Mova Scotia had been located but it was felt that it was too far from New York eventually an thtr site was located and taken a few ilea from Oshava Ontario on the north sh re of Lake Oat. rio. A provisional construction budget of 100 000 dollar 110 000 Canadian dollars was sanctioned and building operations commenced in September. It was hc. ed t open the C&rop S.T.S.103 before t 5fc end of October but for various reasons this was not found possible until the beginning of December.  The Cctrap was given the name of Special Training School 103 It consisted ofs   a Guest house with accommodation for six errors either officers or students.  b Large building housing the garages heating plant water plant etc.  c Main building consisting of officers' and students quarters and messes with accommodation for four officers and four students  d Main administration building comprising four offices one orderly room one 1 rge lecture room  e Staff quarters for eight N.C.O.'s and approximately thirty men.  f Cottage for W/T training with classrooms for housing the equipment. On the ground floor of t. Is cottage Is the M.C.Q. ss and men's canteen.  g Sew building recently completed houses two large trans-liters aerials for ich are now being erected. This building will also accomodate six W/T operators.  h Small stone house for storing ex loaivcs and incendiary devices  i Revolver range in the men's quarters in which the weapons and ammunition are stored.  j Sandbagged hut on the lake share ith bullet-proof windows from which students ca. . obs-nre the effects of explor ons to. A fire whose cause was unknown broke out on the night of April 9th nd destroyed the main building conqistin of officers' and students' quarters. Since then a marquee and two bell tents h&v been u ed pending the r construction of this building W ich st ould b completed by July 10th, 95  Courses at the aehoold consisted of training in Intelligence ertafcion of an S.0.1. organization in the field handling of agents security counter-espionage unamed coabat small arms demolitione and incendiarism nd wireless telegraphy.  Chi May 11 19A2 GT.4 arrived in Canada to assist CT.3 and GT.3 was seconded to Colonel Donovan's organization to instruct hie future instructors. G1.4 began his lectures at the school on May 25 but suffered a cerebral haemorrhage on the evening of May 28 and died in hospital on June 3rd. GT.3 was thereupon instructed to etum to the school and take ver instruction .riding the arrival f a successor to  GT.4.  S.T.S.103 which opened its fi st course Dt c. siber 9 1941 has to date completed JO c ourses varying in duration and types of training. This training has covered S.Q. South American Security  S.I. and Propaganda amongst other and a v ry varied number of subjects are t ught to students. In addition to this para-sdlitary training is now being giv n and .ill form a screen for fch preliminary obs rvation of students many of v..oa later will become S.O. agents or organizers. Work carried on by the School both in its actual training nd in the willingness an . ability o. its instructors an-rtaff to collaborate with .all branches of the British and U.S. Services has been of the greatest value during the year.  Accommoiation for H concerned training equipment and apparatus hav all bee Kept fully up to requirerr.enta outdoor work and scheme for the students have been developed through th year to the great advantage of the men trained.  The closest liaison with S.S.S. in Washington has been carried on principally b the Commandant MT/W whose appointment as Advisory Director of Training to O.S.S. has enabled hi to exert a great influence on the-0.S.5. organization training. His services have been most warmly commended by O.S.S. and he will be greatly dsaed when he relin uishes this post., 94  Tables follow snowing numbers of men trained during the period from opening of school t March 1 1943. Full details of training etc. hav . been covered by Coamandant's report on the School dated. December 7 1942. fletallii O.r Students Trair dt   S.O.Office...21 S.O. Field.. .....5S-This includes 22 Jugoslavs & 3 Italians. S.I.Staff..15 S.I. Field. 13 O.S.S. Office......... 8 O.S.S.Field. 18 O.S.S. Instructors... 14 F.S.l. .......10 R.C.M.P. 4 British Passport Control............. 1 W/TOperators... ...19 O. W Security Officers for South America..53 P. i Psychological Warfare -Branch U.S. Army.....6 TOTAL 273, 98  7 PoGuaenterg.jvarf&re.  The creation of Station M was one of the natwral oevslop   aients of the G.P Section when it was decided to sake a distinction  between psychological and physical operations. The usefulness of  letter-writing and other documentary work was one of the points In  G P. s program but it was'quickly realised that the manufacture  of documents was a highly -specialized operation demanding-all kinds  of scientific assistance.  On July 18 1941 a mmar&ndw vm sent to London siting  forth the proposed functions of Station 1. This was approved on  August 8th. The Station was set up in Canada for reasons of  security and from that time its work was divided between two fields -   Sew fork and Toronto.   a New York. Planning.  1. The collection cataloguing and filing of s. mass of papers and exhibits in connection with the work of reproducing documents etc Throu-'h the various censorships there aero compiled collections of pass ports laissea-passers and other permit passes and personal papers Glean not paper and stationery of every kind with the printed headings of hotels govern ment offices private firms etc used notepaper of enemy Babascles government offices firms site as models for reproduction. Coyles of these catalogues  in which every pice bears a key mabsr are sent to London regularly 2. Actual writing of texts for documents which re sub sequently manufactured ' in Toronto. Also the writing of material for special propaganda operations such as the Vik booklet for circulation In South America the Advice to Traveller' leaflet etc. 8. General work on subjects of a technical nature -e.g the possibility of an envelope which could not be opened by steaming or any other method except cutting and upon a plastic which could be used for the direct reproduction of seals with s view to obviating the laborious process of making plaster casts and from them electros.  fe Masia-   The organization was centred around a Scientist who  after studying the problem of questioned documents  with the R.C.M.P. at Regina was settled in a small  laboratory equipped to handle all matters relating to  the reproduction of documents. In his spar time this  scientist was also engaged in research work on Secret, % Inks tha erasure of inks from passports etc. On the  Manufacturing side there were paper-makers printers  typewriter experts a handwriting expert etc. These  men were sworn in and were not paid.  This work has now been taken over by the C organization.  0 Z Qaasfta agpii s Mcpms  The accounts of the G organisation are kept by competent officers attached for tha purpose. The accompanying diagram explains the allocation of expenditure by divisions snd sections together with relative percentages.  In this connection it should be noted that London and other SOE stations abroad have now adopted the system of asking Sew York to purchase and despatch material to them.  Registry.  During the oast nine months G. headquarters has built up a eonaiderable volume of records. At present tho registry contains over 2 500 files and a card index of 25 000 names of individuals and  subjects.  9. Washington Office. The Washington office was opened early in October 1941 for the purpose of maintaining liaison with the Co-Ordinator of Information the F.S.I. the British Babassy and the various missions and Government Departments. On November 5th 1041 G.500 was appointed the first S.O. New York representative.  The work in Washington has developed into liaison with the following   a Th Co-Ordinator of Information  b H M Embassy  c British Joint Staff Slasion and the Joint Intelligence Committee.  d Psychological Warfare Branch of the tJ.S. War Department. The first and last of these have already been dealt with. Liaison with the Embassy has been maintained. Many discus sions have taken place with senior members there regarding activities, DISPOSITION OF S.O. DOLLAR EXPFNDED,   SX 97 in Latin Africa &ni a con iU r bl aount of irsforaatioB ban bean ra&d awlls le Trm tto t l g7 i%8 blch they receive frosa ISBbawsias and Legatians in Latin a.rjei-ie Li&isan with ite War trad Dayartawnt MKf have alao been very dose and they tMRp vary helpful in aupolying 0. with eeoaaraie information. Lisieon with the Joint Staff iisnion of which the Joint tntelliganee Coenittaa is on a reaaooahly close basts G.SOO hoing 5. s personal raprss ntst.ivs on the Junior Coeuaittee. % liaison with the other brawhes of Joint Staff Mission la now aufficiently intimate for them to visit the Washington Office quite sutoamtieslly should any natters ari-e in their fiiscussiona either aaongst the salvoB or with the Anericane which in say way affect SOI, f REPORT 0 H BRITISH SECURITY CO-ORDINATION IN THE UNITED STATES OE AMERICA PART IV / PASSPORT CO NTROL  P.C.O., PART IV  PASSPORT CONTROL   P.C.O., CONTENTS  Page Number  I History.  1. 1959-1941........... 1 2. 1941-1942.. 2 5. 1 Appendices.  1. Temporary Visitors Card 2. Special Visa Application Form 5. Memorandum of Instructions to British Visa Issuing Posts in the U.S.A. 28.1.42 4. Modification of Above Instructions with regard to U.S. Citizens Proceeding to U.S. Bases in British Territory 6.5.42 5. Instructions Regarding Official or Semi-official Travellers 22.5.42 6. Current British Visa Application Forms for Persons of Official Status. 7. Current British Visa Application Forms for Persons of Non-official status. 8. Personal History Statement., REPORT 0N BRITISH PASSPORT CONTROL IN  THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA New York March 1945. ife Kassfe9, 1. HISTORY. 1. 1939-1941. Except in the case of travellers to the United Kingdom and India visa issuing posts in the United States prior to the entry of that country into the war were left much to their own devices in the matter of granting visas and interpreting the instructions issued periodically by the Passport Control Department in London. The visas granted by visa issuing posts including the Passport Control Office in New York were recorded in the form of visa cards see Appendix l . These cards which dated from pre-war days contained a minimum amount of useful information and constituted the central visa record of the Passport Control Office. A common visa application form see Appendix 2 was in use in al 1 visa issuing posts in the United States including the Passport Control Office. Copies of these forms were received from visa issuing posts only in cases where they related to travellers proceeding to the United Kingdom or whose cases needed prior reference before the visa was granted. In any case these forms failed to provide the information necessary for the Passport Control Office purposes.  The Passport Control Office staff consisted of a Passport Control Officer an Assistant Passport Control Officer a Senior Examiner three Interviewers a receptionist and a female secretary. The Passport Control Ofiice account at the bank was held in the names of the first two officers., 2  2 1941-1942.  The entry of the United t&.tes into the war in December 1941 afforded rjn opportunity for a revision of the Passport Control organisation to be affected. The first step was the coordination of tht work of visa issuing posts in the United States with the ork of the Passport Control Office and the various British control posts in close proximity to the American mainland. The primary object was to bring visa issuing posts under the complete control of the Passport Control Office both in the matter of granting visas and in regard to supplying comprehensive particulars regarding intending travellers to or through British possessions.  The visa card used for visa reporting pur oses had proved quite inadequate as also had the visa application form which in any case was made available to the Passport Control Office only in the cases already stated. The first practical'step was taken in January 1942 toward re-organisation of the Passport Control Of ice when a memorandum of instructions was circulated to visa issuing posts in the United States and copies forwarded for information to the British Control points at Bermuda Jamaica and Trinidad and the Director of Passport Control in London. Supplies of a new visa application form were distributed to visa issuing posts and the photograph requirement for visa applicants was introduced. A copy of the memorandum referred to forms Appendix 3  While the number f normal travellers decreased to insignificant proportions following American entry into the war the number of persons proceeding to various points of the British Liapire to work directly or indirectly in the war effort considerably increased. The circular instructions of January referred to above were therefore modified by subsequent instructions circulated to visa issuing posts and copied to British Control points on May 6 1942. This circular a copy of which forms Appendix. 4 had regard solely to a base workers b persons proceeding abroad on behalf of the American war effort. As a final step in the introduction of a coordinated visa system  special arrangements were made to deal with the increasing number of persons  travelling in an official or semi-official capacity. Special Instructions  regarding this category of traveller were circulated to visa issuing posts  and copied to British Control points on May 22. A copy of the memorandum forms, s  Appendix 5. The three memoranda referred to above embrace the details of the coordinated vigasystem affecting the U.S.A.  The working of this system has considerably increased the work of the Passport Control Office which now is responsible for all British visas granted in the United States except in the few cases of United States citisens travelling in direct transit through British control points A  regular interchange of visa application forms plus additional information regarding travellers passes between visa issuing posts the Pass ort Control Office and the British control points  5. 1942-1945 Mr. Heaney Assistant Passport Control 0ffleer left for London in July 1942 and did not return to the Passport Control Office. On September 1st Captain I. MeEwen was appointed Assistant Passport Control Officer.  At this time it was decided to adopt a simpler system of visa application cards based on the old system since these were found to be preferable on account of their being easier to handle and taking u less space for filing. The new cards retained most of the essential questions from the forms then in use. A copy of the new card which is at present in use for applicants who possess official status forms Appendix 6 and the card in use for other individuals forms Appendix 7. These cards are now considered sufficient as each applicant is also Interviewed by an examiner. However in special cases such as tec niclans going to the United Kingdom or persons born in enemy countries or whether there is an element of doubt a Personal History Statement is used and passed to Security Division of Security Co-Ordination for checking. A copy of this statement forms Appendix 8.  British visas granted in the United States average approximately 5 000 a month and practically all are granted to United States citizens over Q0% of whom are going abroad to engage in work directly or indirectly con nected with the war effort.  In view of the fact that the British Consulate in Miami in 1942 was issuing up to eight hundred visas a month it was decided to open a branch office of the P.C.O. in Miami. This office was opened on December 7th 1942 and Mr. J. Savage was appointed Assistant Passport Control Officer., APPENDICES  1. Temporary Visitors Card 2. Special Visa Application Form 5. Memorandum of Instructions to British Visa Issuing Posts in the D.S.A. 8.1.42 4. Modification of Above Instructions with regard to D.S. Citizens Proceeding to U.S. Bases in British territory 6.5.42 5. Instructions Regarding Official or Semi-official Travellers 22.5.42 . 6. Current British Visa Application Forms for Persons of Official Status. 7. Current British Visa Application Forms for Persons of Non-official Status. 8. Personal History Statement., TEMPORARY VISITOR S CARD Mr. Mrs. .... Mjss Family name lirst.  Nationality No. of Passport  J ermanent address Date of sailing if known and ship. Reasons for journey and length of visit Names of other persons included on Passport and date of birth of any children included Name of First Port of landing in Great Britain or Ireland Names of British Countries Dominions Colonies or Mandated Territories you desire to visit... Do you hold a ReturnTicket ... I certify that the object of my journey is a Temporary Visit only and that it is not my intention to take up either permanent residence or employment in British Territory.  Signature of passport holder. Date No. Consulate. READ CAREFULLY.  1 This form is intended for use only bv applicants for visas who are desirous ot paying a temporary visit to British Territory. IT SHOULD NOT BE USED BY THOSE WHO INTEND TO TAKE UP PERMANENT RESIDENCE OR ANY FORM OF EMPLOY MENT EITHER PAID OR UNPAID IN BRITISH TERRITORY.  2 If the first port of landing in British Territory is in the Irish Free State travellers must obtain a visa from an Irish Free State Consulate. Such visa will be good for a sub sequent visit to Great Britain or Northern Ireland.  3 Conversely travellers obtaining a visa for Great Britain and Northern Ireland may subsequently use this visa for a visit to the Irish Free State provided that they have first made a landing in Great Britain.  4 If an Irish Free State visa is obtained for a visit to the Irish Free State and Great Britain and Northern Ireland an additional visa is required in order to visit certain other parts of the British Empire.  8153 Wt.P.1425 100m 14 8/38 Gp.697 C&SLtd., , SPECIAL VISA APPLICATION FOBM APPENDIX 2 .  1. Name in full Family name first inCAPITALS 2. Permanentaddress 3. Address in New York City or point at which visa is requested 4. Names of other persons on passport in case of children give date of birth andbirthplace 5. Nationality Number ofPassport Date of issue Place ofissue Is it valid for return to your country of residence Passport is validuntil  6. Country and date ofbirth If naturalized give date ofnaturalization  7.Occupation 8. Purpose ofvisit 9.Destination 10. Route to befollowed 11. If visit is for business state kind of business and gives names and address of business firms you willvisit 12 If visit is not for business state names and addresses of persons whom you proposevisiting  Port of  13. DepartureDate Ship Embarkation 14. State British territories for which visa is desired and length of time in each Britishcountry If in transit give particulars. Bankreference Business references in U.S.A.  DATE SIGNATURE., APF..MDIX 3.  ME M.0RAM DU M.  The entrance of the United States into the war has facilitated our efforts to detect and restrict the movements of travellers engaged in activities inimical to the United Nations. Our efforts in the above regard may now be made more effective by closer collaboration with the United States Authorities whose outlook is now identic 1 with our own an by co-ordinating our visa system with the activities of the immigration and Censorship Services in British territory particularly the British control points at Bermuda and Trinidad.  The above considerations have prompted the formulation of new visa regulations a copy of which is enclosed herein together with a supply of the new visa application forms the use of which will replace the present card system as the medium for visa reporting.  Under the new regulations outgoing tr vellers from the United States are divided into three principal gr ups as follows   a United States Citizens b Nationals of Enemy Occupied Countries  c Other Nationals . The new visa application fom will be the co-ordinating medium in the refining process beginning with interrogation of the duplicate application form against the central record of the Passport Control Office and continuing with the interrogation of the traveller at the British control point.  The control points will be furnished by the Passport Control Office with copies of visa applications submitted by travellers intending to pass through or visit their respective territories. It is particularly important that applicants in completing the visa application forms should be explicit and precise., -2-   It will be obs .rved that except for United States citizens proceeding under contract to bases in British territory and United States citizens in transit through British territory all applicants for visas transit or otherwise should now be referred for decision to this office.  The new instructions do not supersede standing instructions regarding   1 Diplomatic visas which will continue to be granted by His Majesty's Embassy  2 Official courtesy visas which will continue to be granted without reference to this office  3 The waiving of the visa requirement in accord ance with local arrang nents uch as exit in the Bahamas and Barbados .ill continue to be effective  4 The need for reference to this office of all visa applications submitted by U.S. Citizens bom in enemy territory Visa issuing posts should not hesitate to refer to this office in any cases where a doubt arises whether with regard to the applicant or the procedure to be followed., PROCEDURE FOE GRANTING BRITISH VISAS IN THE  VTOil-STATES  A UNITED STATIS CITIZENS  JJOTEs United States passports are now granted only after the American Authorities have satisfied themselves regarding the travellers' bona fldes and the necessity for his or her journey. United States passports are no restricted in validity to a period of six months and are valid only for the particular territory to be visited during the course of the journey for which the passport has been issued.  Category Is UEXT.D ST T t .CITll E .P. UCr.MjI u rQ udlT STATES  BASES IN linlTIii V-rdllOKf. All such travellers are now made the subject of a thorough investigation by the American Authorities before being granted passports. Such persons may therefore be granted British visas without being required to complete the visa application form provided of course that their passports contain the State Depart ment's validation for the base to which they arc proceeding and that they are in the possession of a contractor's letter stating that they are being engaged for defence work. On arrival at the bases such travellers are subject to American supervision discipline and control.  Visa issuing osts should continue to use the card system for reporting visas granted to travellers of this category.  United States citizens wishing to join relatives engaged on defence projects in British territory are now generally refused passports by United States Authorities. Such applicants presenting United States passports containing a base validation granted prior to December 7th should be referred back to the State Department for a revalidationj which normally will not be granted. In special cases where a validation is granted after December 7th the applicant will be subject to the procedure set forth under Category 3 below. Clte pry . UNITED ST-T1 CITIZxMS 1U Ti.iJSIT T .UGH BhITIfi TIj-.MTOHl  All such tr Tellers should complete the visa application form in duplicate and furnish three photographs. The transit visa may then be granted. The duplicate visa application form together with, two photographs and any additional information . hich the visa issuing post may consider useful should be forwarded by air mail to the Passport Control Office. Subsequently a copy of the visa application form will be sent by this office to the British control point through h ch the traveller  intends to pass. Category 3 UM1TID STATES CITIZrhS TO D1ST1MT10N 1M R iTI-TIRXilTOKY.  Such travellers should complete the application form in duplicate and furnish three photographs. The duplicate form together ith two photographs and any additional information which the visa issuing office  consider useful should be forwarded to this office for checking against Passport Control records and where considered necessary for further investigation. Visas should n t be granted until an authorization has been received from this office. Subsequently a copy of the visa application form will be sent by the Passport Control Office to the authorities in the British territory which the traveller intends to visit Applic nts who take exception to the delay Involved arc free to apply in person at this office where however they will be subject to the same checking process as would normally be applied if their plication had. been transmitted through a consular post.  B Ki&IOiiAn OF i rU OCCJILl CuUNTIillS. NQTEi Aliens leaving the United States are required to be in possession of an Exit or Re-entry permit. These permits are granted only after the aliens have satisfied the American Authorities regarding their bona Tides and the necessity for the journey. Applicants for British visas under this category should before being emitted to complete the visa application form produce a card from the United States Immigration Authorities formally stating that an Exit permit will be is ued at the time of embarkation.  To ensure that travelling facilities shall be granted only to those nationals whose sympathies lie with the United Nations it has been decided that all applicants under this category whether applying for transit or ordinary visa shall before being permitted to complete a visa application form rovide a letter of recommendation from their consular representative, -3   appointed by their government in exile or in the absence of such representatives from their recognised national organization in the U.S.A. Such applicants should then complete the visa application form in duplicate and furnish three photographs. The duplicate application form together with two photographs should then be forwarded to this office together with any other information which may be considered useful. Visas should not be granted until an authorization has been received from this office. Subsequently copies cf the visa application form . ill be made and forwarded by the Passport Control Office to the auth rities in the British territory which the traveller intends to transit or visit.  C OTHER MATIOHALS.  NOTE Aliens leaving the United St tes are requin d to be in possession of an Exit or Re-entry permit. These permits are granted onlyafter the aliens have satisfied the American Authorities regarding their bona fides and the necessity for the journey. Applicants for British visas under this category should before being permitted to complete the visa application form produce a card from the United States Immigration Authorities formally stating that an Exit permit will be issued at the time of embarkation.  Such applicants should furnish two letters of recommendation from reputable local sources after which they should complete the visa application form together with two photographs should then be forwarded to this office for checking-against P.C.O. records and where conside ed necessary for further investigation. Visas should not be granted until an authorisation has been received from this office. Subsequently a copy of the visa application forns will be forwarded by the Passport Control Office to the British control point through which the traveller is intending to pass or the British territory to be visited., APPVHDIX A.  T/575 New York City  Dear Consulate-General  Consulate  Vice-Consulate.  We enclose herein a memorandum setting forth the procedure to be adopted in dealing with applications for visas made by United States citizens proceeding o the bases named in the Anglo-American Base Agreement. We should perhaps explain that a considerable increase in this category of traveller has taken place in recent months % ith a corresponding increase in the percentage of those who were bom in enemy territory or of enemy parentage.  It has therefor . become desirable that this office should be placed in possession of fuller information respecting these travellers than that at present furnished in the form of the visa card. The new procedure is a step toward the elimination of the visa card the use of which will now be restricted to travellers entitled to receive official visas.  Yours ever  PASSPORT CONTROL OFFICE, T/572. BRITISH PASSPORT CONTROL OFFICE  NEW YORK.  it .Q'.i DUM. With reference to the visa regulations circulated in P.C.O. Memor.-ndum dated J muary 28 1942 it has now become desirable to modify the requirements in respect of travellers in Category A l  i-e. U. S. citizens proceeding to U. S. bases in British territory .  1. Travellers to bases are divided into two categories as follows a Under the provisions of Section l . Article 13 the Anglo- American Bast Agreement members of the United States Forces proceeding to the Leaked Area or any person employed by or under contract with the United St tes Government in connection with the construction maintenance operation or defence of the Bases are not subject to the Immigration Regulations obtaining in the various territories in which Bases are located. Such persons are grant.d cards of identity issued by the United St tes War or Naval Department Holders of these identity cards are not subject to investigation by us nor are they required to possess British visas. Nothing that follows refers to this class of travell r to Bases nor will the present arrangement regarding them be in any way modified.  b Persons proceeding bo Bases who are recruited by contractors are not granted identity cards by United States authorities who insist on them being in possession of valid United Stated passports. Such persons are subject to the British visa requirements. 2. It has become necessary both for our own pur. oses and for the benefit of the United States authorities that we should be in possession of mor recise information regarding travellers in this particular category than that at present furnished in the visa cards. Consequently a visa application form fo use in the case of Base workers has been designed and a supply is forwarded herein. 3. Base workers should complete the visa application form in duplicate. It may be found convenient to arrange for this formality to be completed by the contractor whose office representative will also be required to countersign the form. The visa may be granted after the visa application form has been completed and without prior reference to this office. Subsecuant ly one copy of the form should be forwarded to this office in the same way as the white forms relating to other categories of traveller are now passed.... This arrangement will supersede tht present card system of reporting visas granted to Base workers. The forms so transmitted will be checked against the records of this office and will be made available to the United States authorities who not infrequently apply to us for information. No photographs are required and notes 1 and 2 at the end of the V.A.F. may be ignored.  4. The Bases referred to abov are those enumerated in the Anglo- American Base Agreement i.e. Bermuda Trinidad Jamaica Antigua St. Lucia ibcuma Island British Guiana and Newf undland . 5 Visa applicants employed in work connected ith the war effort  such as employees of American aircraft and construction companies etc. and who are proceeding to arts of the British Empire other than those specified in the Anglo-American Base Agreement should not be considered as Base workers. Such applicants are subject to the visa regulations applicable to travellers in Category A3 see P.C.O. Memorandum dated January 28 1942 and as such should couplet wi.nte visa ap lication forms., -2   6 It is realized that in dealing with such cases it will frequently be necessary to obviate the delay occasioned by reference of the visa application forms to this office. In such instances visa issuing posts should use their discretion in granting visas without prior reference. Where this course is adopted however an indication to this effect should be made in the copies of the visa application form forwarded to the Passport Control Office in New York. Should subsequent checking at this office bring to light adverse information regarding a traveller granted a visa under the discretionary powers given above the case will be taken up by the Passport Control Office direct with the British authorities in the territory concerned.  7. The use of the visa card as a means of reporting visas granted will from now on be restricted to travellers entitled to receive Diplomatic or Of icial courtesy visas. A new procedure relating to this category of traveller will however shortly be introduced and an explanatory Memor ndum will be circulated soon.  Signed R. S. Haney.  Asst. Passport Control Officer, BRITISH VISA APPLICATION FORM for United States citizens engaged on war projects.  Applicants are advised that FAILURE TO FURNISH PRECISE INFORMATION in answering the following questions may involve delay in the grant of the visa required.  Personal Particulars   a Name PRINT IN FULL ..  b Home address.  c Place of birth Country . Town .  d Date of birth.  e Nationality at birth.  f If a naturalized citizen state date.and place.ofnaturalization.  g Nationality offather. h Nationality ofmother.  i Ifmarried statenationalityofwifeprevioustomarriage. Occupational Particulars   a Occupation...  b Name of firm.  c Address offirm.  d Occupation prior to present employment.  e Previous employer. References   a State particulars of two 2 responsible residents in the U. S. A. to whom you are well known. Name. Address. Occupation.  Passport Particulars   a Number. b Date of issue  c Place of issue. d Date of expiry Travel Particulars   a Destination.  b Territory for which British visa is required.  c Port and date of departure, 6. Previous Visits to British Territory If you have visited British territory since August 1939 state where when and for what purpose. If visit was in transit state also final destination.  Signature of applicant Company Countersignature Date 1942. NOTES 1. 2. 3. Please complete this form in duplicate. Please furnish two 2 identical photographs presenting full face vision of normal passport photograph size. Any changes affecting status travelling arrangements or other matter with which this form is concerned occurring after the British visa has been granted should be communicated to this office in order to obviate the possibility of difficulties on arrival in British territory., BRITISH PASSPORT CONTIiOL OFFICE Mew York  T/579  With reference to paragraph of the Memorandum  T/572 enclosed in P.C.O circular T/575 of May 6 1942 it has become 'ieairablc for this office to be provided with  ore precise information regarding persons to whom Diplomatic or Official Courtesy visas are granted. For this purpose we enclose herein a supply of Forms F which sh uld be completed in respect of all travellers in the above category.  The form has been designed to provide the minimum information necessary for P.C.O. purposes consequently it is important that in completing it applicants should be explicit.  Photographs will not be required in the case of official travellers although it ould be helpful if visa Issuing posts when transmitting conpleted forms to this office would include any additional information in their possession regarding the traveller p rticularly in the case f couriers.  The grant of a Diplomatic or Official Courtesy visa should not of course be made dependent upon completion of Form F which is intended for information and record purposes only. Copies of completed forms should however be forwarded to this office as soon as possible after the grant of the visa.  The use of a visa application forra for official travellers constitutes the final step in the introduction of the co-ordinated visa system envisaged in P.C.O. circular dated January 28 1942. The visa card which is no longer suitable for  P.C.O. purposes has now been eliminated as the medium for visa reporting. PASSPORT COSTROL OFFICE.   To visa issuing posts only.  CIKCULAT-D TO ALL COMfULAl .-OSTS., Official Visa BRITISH VISA INFORMATION FORM 1. Personal particulars  a Name in full .  b Nationality .  c Local address..  d Place and date of birth .  e Married or single . 2. Particulars of wife if included in husband's passport  a Full name before marriage .  b Place and date of birth .  c Nationality prior to marriage . 3. Official particulars  a Government by which accredited.  b Official status.  c If Consular Officer where stationed .  d If not career officer state normal profession . 4. Passport particulars  a Official or regular passport .  b Number .  c Date and place of issue .  d Date of expiration . 5. Visa  a particulars British territory for which visa is required  b Duration of visit . 6. Travel particulars  a Ultimate destination .  b Probable date of departure from U. S. A. ...  c  d Means of transportation . steamship Intended route to final destination . Signature of Applicant Diplomatic Official Courtesy Visa granted on. Gratis Signature of Visa Issuing Official, BRITISH VISA APPLICATION FORM.  NAME Print in Full  Family name Given names Nationality... Localaddress. Place ofbirth. Date ofbirth. Married orSingle. Government by which accredited. Officialstatus.  fficial or RegularPassport. Number.-. Date ofissue.Place of issue Date ofexpiry. . FORM 31450011-42 No. British Territory for which Visa is desired Ultimate destination Permanent address Signature, , BRITISH VISA APPLICATION FORM  Visa No.  ALL QUESTIONS MUST BE ANSWERED Mr. ALL ANSWERS MUST BE PRINTED Granted at British Countries for which Visa is desired    FamLIy Name Given Namejj Nationality.Nat. at Birth. Place of Birth- Date of Birth-  If Nationality Changed give place and date-Purpose of Journey in detail -  Occupation. Name and Address of Firm-Permanent Address   . Length of Time with Firm. Local Address sport No.Issued at If you have ever been known by any name other than Date of Issue.Valid to-that given in passport note same here Nationality of Father.Of Mother. PLEASE FURNISH ONE PASSPORT PHOTOGRAPH. OVER, REFERENCES Give below the names of two references in the U. S. A. to whom you are well known NAME ADDRESS NATIONALITY If married please furnish the following additional information Family and Given Names of Wife orHusband . Place of Birth of Wife orHusband .-.-. Date of Birth of Wife orHusband .-. Nationality of Wife orHusband -.Nat. atbirth-. If accompanied by children state name age and place of birth ofeach. Signature. OBSERVATIONS, , APPENDIX 8 BRITISH SECURITY CO-ORDINATION PERSONAL HISTORY STATEMENT  i rint or Type Note In order to avoid unnecessary delay it is essential that all questions be answered completely. 1. Name in Full.. Last First Middle 2. Present Postal Address.. Telephone No.. Street and No. City State 3. Normal Residence Address if different from above .. Street and No. City State 4. Residence Address for Past 3 Years if different from above Street and No. City and State From To 5. Date opBibth.'..Placeof Bibth.. Mouth Day Year 6. Present Nationality. 7. Have You Possessed a Previous Nationality . 8. If Naturalized Give Date Court and Location.. 9. Father's FullName. Father's Address... Father's Birthplace fulldetails .Date.. Father s Nationality.Descent. If Natupalized. Gjve Date Court andLocation. Has Father Actively Served in any Military or Naval Service . If so giveparticulars. 10. Mother's MaidenName... Mother sAddress..'. Mother s Birthplace fulldetails .Date.. Mother sNationality.Descent. If Naturalized Give Date Court andLocation. 11. Single.. Married. Widowed. Divorced. Separated..  If divorced or separated please give date 12. Wife s MaidenName... Wife s Address. Wife s Birthplace fulldetails .Date.. Wife s Nationality.Descent. If Naturalized Give Date Court andLocation. 13. Have You Resided Outside the United States . If so when andwhere. [over], w. . 14. Have You Any Relatives Presently Residing Outside the United States . If so please list name of relatives their relation to you and country of residence Name.Country.. Relation.. Name.Country. Relation.. Name...Country. Relation..  15. Have You Ever Been Known by Any Other Name Than the One Used Here If so please give name used and whether or not the change was legal. 16. Are You Registered Under the Selective Service Act . Local BoardNo. Address. Classification. Approximate InductionDate. If Deferred givereason.and authority.. 17. What is Your NormalOccupation . 18. Names and Addresses op Previous Employers for Last Three Years Address  Name From To  Street & No. City State 19. Give 3 References Not Relatives or Former Employers references who also know your family preferred Address How long Occupation  Name Street & No. City State known or Position 20. Have You Been a Member of the Armed Forces of Any Government .. If yes please indicateGovernment. . Length ofservice. Reasons forleaving.]