[, June 2nd 1942. 1. S.O. in Latin America  Its Past History Present Resources Future Possibilities. g. Notes on S.O. Chief Agents in South America and their Organiz ations. 3-G.I. Section New York. 4. Map of Central and South America showing Main Lines of S.O. Communications., June 2nd 1942  S.O. IN LATIN AMERICA  ITS PAST HISTORY PRESENT RESOURCES AND FUTURE POSSIBILITIES. The S.O. Organization throughout Latin America has had a rapid growth but it is fair to say that it has developed into a sturdy and well-formed tree. Springing from the bare earth eighteen months ago by June 1941 six but only six Chief Agents were operating. Their only communications withthis ofxice were by  L.M.T. Code. At that time the entire west coast Ecuador Peru and Chile was considered part of G.JOOO's territory and one sub-agent for each of those countries was in communication with Bogota but not with New York. At the time of writing S.O. has a Chief Agent at work in every Latin American country except for Guatemala Paraguay and the Guianas with the temporary exception of Bolivia where G.16 000 has proved unsatisfactory and a changeover is taking place.  In Central America the L.M.T. code Is now used in conjunction with one time pads but every other territory possesses at least one agent with official cover or access to an extra-territorial office who is in charge of a War Office cypher and in direct communication with New York. In addition inter and intra-territorial communications have been established wherever they serve a useful purpose and in Brazil there are S.O. agents with direct communications to New York at work in Recife Sao Paulo and Curityba as well as in the capital.  While S.O. agents did the best they could establishing useful contacts building up rudimentary informant services inspiring propa, -2   ganda and surveying their territories for targets etc until December 1941 they were labouring under the obvious handicaps of amateurs tackling a difficult technical problem for which the experience and education of their peacetime lives had in no way equipped them.  All the Chief Agents have visited New York and spent a week ortwo acquiring what instruction it was possible to give them in this office and two tours of South America were made by Colonel Vickers and G.300 and one by G.100. But it must be remembered that until the summer of 1941 the strength of S.O.'s New York office never exceeded three full-time officials.  A great stride forward in efficiency was made in December 1941 when the training camp near Toronto was finally completed and started functioning since then 1 of our agents in the field have attended courses where they received the benefit of the best existing technical and theoretical training for their work.  It is a tribute to those responsible for the selecting of these agents that they earned uniformly favourable reports several among them being described by the chief instructor as among the best men he has ever handled.  At present S.O. controls a network of 14 chief agents employing no less than 219 sub agents and contacts covering almost every area from the Rio Grande to Cape Horn. Each area is organized on standard lines with a Chief Agent liaising with the local YP a Chief Assistant who maintains contact through cut-outs with propaganda minorities opposition groups key men in communications and industry thugs etc. and a parallel but separate shadow organization composed entirely of nationals of the country.  In Chile Peru Venezuela and Uruguay S.O. organization on, -3  the above lines is virtually complete. In Ecuador Brazil and Central America it is far advanced towards completion. In Argentine C-.6000 has not yet found a satisfactory man to head his shadow organ ization but has every other branch efficiently set up. S.O. has trod warily in Mexico where G.8 500 has a skeleton organization chiefly for purposes of intelligence and recruiting and in Colombia owing to the extrsnely close cooperation between S.O. and the Chief of the special branch of the Colombian police G.5 500's organization is built on a different plan which is highly effective while the present Government retains power as the services of nearly 300 police agents are at G.5 500's disposal.  During the past six months every territory has sent either its Chief Agent or his assistant to New York and Canada where every effort has been made by the staff of the New York office to get to know them to make friends of them and in fact to reach a personal relationship which makes for mutual trust and understanding.  It is no exaggeration to say that these efforts have been markedly successful. There is now no Chief Agent who is not confident that he can count on the support and energetic help of the Head Office in any emergency and in return it has become more than ever obvious of late that the organization as a whole can rely on a great volume of hard work and conscientious effort from its Agents in the field.  In accordance with the general policy no operations whatever have been attempted since America's entry into the War however in spite of this directive which must be discouraging to a man in the field the keenness of our agents has in no way diminished. All stations have been sending in a wealth of intelligence material and all instruc, -   4   tions from the New York office have been promptly and efficiently carried out. Since April all stations have been working on the W/T communications scheme which is being carried out jointly by  S.O. and S.I. and many of the required operators have been selected and are already undergoing training. The principal weakness which would be felt by the organ ization should it be called upon to carry out any operations involving the use of explosives is the lack of stores of toys and devices in the field.  S.O. New York have some stores at the training school in Canada and have now taken delivery of a considerable stock in Trinidad. In addition dumps have been built or excavated in Belize Peru Chile and Uruguay others are under construction in most of the remaining territories. They are unfortunately at present empty however certain quantities of commercial explosives gelignite & dynamite are at the disposal of some S.O. Chief Agents notably in Peru and Uruguay. A small selection including some limpets incend iaries and P.E. is in the hands of G.14 100 in Recife. Further all Chief Agents have been supplied with comprehensive directions for the manufacture of home-made incendiary and other devices from materials which can be readily and innocently obtained on the spot. One sub agent of G.6 000 s in Argentine is an experimental chemist and explos ives expert who has constructed a number of devices in a secret lab oratory in B.A. Taken as a whole it must be admitted S.O. is not as yet as well provided with the tools of the saboteurs trade as it is with the men trained to handle them and the organization equipped to set  them in motion. If it were decided to establish dumps in the field, -5   a month or six weeks should suffice to remedy this.  S.O. attempted very few operations during 1941 and several plans in connection with enemy shipping that were laid on were cancelled by orders from London before the time came for carry ing them out. Three instances of the effectiveness of S.O. action in the political field may however perhaps be quoted. 1. In July 1941 a Nazi plot to seize power in Bolivia was brought to light in time for the local government to thwart it. This was made possible by the abstraction from the pouch of a German diplomatic courier of a letter from Major Belmonte Bolivian military attache in Berlin containing the details of the projected revolt. S.O. may legitimately take the credit for this exposure which besides strengthening the position of the anti-Axis Bolivian government led to the adoption of numerous security measures throughout South America and encouraged a wave of anti-Nazi feeling even in the U.S. 2. In October 1941 shortly after the declaration by the U.S. of a  shoot on sight policy towards German submarines the President made a radio address to the nation in which he said I have in my possession a map of South America drawn up in Berlin etc. etc. The map to which the President referred was a German document showing the proposed partitioning of South America in accordance with the new World Order dividing it into colonies and spheres of influences of the Axis powers. Although the actual map was never published this revelation of the President's was very widely quoted and discussed and played its part in bringing to the people of America the rellization that this was not merely another European War but that Hitler had designs on the Viestern Hemisphere just as far-reaching as he had on the Old World., 6  It is believed that only three copies of this map were ever made  one of which remained in Hitler's personal possession one in that  of Bohle A.O. Chief and the third was sent to Von Thermann German  Ambassador in the Argentine. S.O. were able to obtain the original  from the German Embassy B.A. and were instrumental in placing it  in President'Roosevelt's hands.  3. President Vargas of Brazil whose son-in-law was President of the Brazilian branch of the LATI airline was long reluctant to take any measures against this Italian Company. His attitude changed overnight however when the American YP in Rio was able to bring to his attention a letter written by General Liotta the President of the Company in Rome to a correspondent in Brazil which contained insulting references to Brazilians in general and Vargas in particular. It was due in great part to the existence of this letter that the Lati concession in Brazil was revoked ten full weeks before Brazil broke off relations with the Axis powers. S.O. was fortunate enough to be the means of bringing this letter which was in the form of a microphotograph concealed in the lining of an Axissympathizer' s clothes to the attention of the American IP. There are good grounds for the assertion that the ultimate goals of S.O. endeavour in the Americas have already been achieved   1 The United States have entered the War  2 The majority of the-Latin American republics are if not at War at least in a state of pro-United Nations non-belligerency  3 And the U.S. has at last awakened to the grave dangers which threaten that irreplaceable storehouse of the raw materials of war South America., -7 -  It would of course be ridiculous to give S.O. the credit for having brovght about either of the first two of these events but it is not unreasonable to allow that we inflicted a series of pin-pricks in the appropriate quarters which contributed a little towards the final result. But for the third S.O. is very largely responsible. For the past year S.O. has realized and has never ceased to proclaim the lifeand- death importance of South America both economically and strategically to the war effort. It has marshalled facts and arguments it has prepared briefs it has continually assaulted the ears of officialdom on both sides of the Atlantic and finally after many discouraging set-backs in spite of constant charges of alarmism it has carried its point with the very group who are charged with the conduct of the war  the Joint Chiefs of Staff in Washington.  The weight of evidence collected and collated by S.O. Intelligence has proved convincing and at last we are able to watch the precautions that we have advocated for so long being taken even by a body that so cordially disapproves of our existence as does the State Department.  In spite of this comforting spectacle however S.O. should beware of relaxing into complacency. Everything that is being done should be done faster and on a larger scale and to prove the necessity for a greater effort every man in the S.O. organization must contrive to collect the facts which underline the need for action to be taken.  Two of the most powerful South American states are still not with us. They are teeming with Axis agents and other enemies of the Allies. G.11 000 and G.6 000 are endeavouring to discover and hamstring the plans of the enemy and they G.11 000 in particular are succeeding in supporting and encouraging our friends to the point where they swing their countries into line with us. In the Republics that are already ostensibly on our side much too remains to be done. When anti-Axis legislation is adopted it, is not always implemented. We must see to it that it is enforced. There are friends of the enemy in high places who must be circumvented. Above all there are powerful agencies among our friends in Washington who must be told persuaded and convinced of what should be done.  In this connection S.O. should be particularly grateful to the training school which by the hospitality accorded to numbers of C.O-I. F.B.I. P.W.D. etc. officials has put all these U.S. Government agencies deeply in our debt. Of those Americans who have attended courses at the school everyone without exception has returned a friend of England and an admirer of S.O. It is the rule rather than the exception for close and sincere friendships to be made between members of the S.O. New York office and their American school-fellows . Friendships viiich in the poss ibilities they create for future cooperation can and should prove to be priceless.  This indeed throws into relief the greatest task which lies ahead. It is the task of educating guiding and cooperating with the Americans in our common aim of preserving South America as an invaluable asset to the democratic cause and in preventing our enemies from gaining control of any part of its territory or economy., June 2nd 1942.  MOTES ON S.O. CHIEF AGENTS IN SOUTH AMERICA AMD THEIR ORGANIZATIONS  1. G.17.000 Chief S.O. Agent for Central America is a New Zealander  3 and as tough a gentleman as is easily met with. Now in the middle thirties and married he has had a versatile career ranging from boxer to newspaper editor. He is aggressive energetic resourceful and patriotic and has considerable personal charm and although not giving the impression of being a particularly brainy man he has his wits about him and is a careful and methodical thinkger. Once he has made up his mind he is inclined to be obstinate and is hard to convince but he has great human qualities which should made him a good leader of men and an excellent Chief Agent in the field. He has many years experience of Central America and has done good work for S.I. and S.O. during the past 18 months. Engaged On recommendation of S.I.S. Panama. Training Has served as liaison officer with the country . Cover T.A.C.A. airline official.  2. G.13.000 S.O. Agent in El Salvador has been in the organization for five months only but has made a good start and has sent in some excellent reports on Salvador Honduras and British Hon duras. He is British 30 married and a veteran of the Repub lican Army in the Spanish Civil War. After the victory of, -2   Fr inco he with his wife and two friends also veterans  obtained a 50 ft. ketch on which they made their home and which they sailed across the Atlantic and among the Caribbean Islands for over three years. G.13 000's political sympathies are far to the left he has a pleasant if rather shy manner and is what the Gestapo would describe as an 'intellectual'. Engaged On recommendation of 0.17 000 Training Has graduated from 'the country'. Cover T.A.C.A. Airline Official.  Agent in Costa Rica is British born in Costa Rica about 40 and married. He is a prominent local business man and estanciero being married to an heiress daugfter of a member of the rich Jamaican-Jewish family of Lindo. G.15 000 is a hard-bitten alert man who looks like a sea-captain. In the six monthe he has been working for S.0. he has done exceptionally well having built up an organization and made a very thorough survey of his territory  i  and all potential S.0. targets in it. Engaged On recommendation of 0.17 000 Training Has graduated from 'the country'.  -Cover Life-long resident.  '  D&A SLp  G.5.500 S.0. Chief Agent in Colombia is British about 40 married to a Brazilian who is still in Rio and anextremely energetic hard working man. He has only been two months in Bogota having gone out as assistant to G.5 000 just before the latter was asked by ZP to resign in accordance with IP's repeatedly expressed desire. G.5 500 then found himself in sole charge of a territory that was, -3  almost unknown to him vri.th his IP refusing him any kind of diplomatic cover and refusing him even office space in the Legation. That he has overcome these difficulties in a space of little more than a month has cemented relations with all G.5000's contacts has continued to send in a great volume of interesting intelligence and reports and has successfully arranged to be appointed honorary attache through the influence of no less a person than President Santos testifies forcefully to his abilities. Until the war he ran his own business in Rio then did some work for S.I.S. Rio and sailed for England summer 1941 in search of a more active war job. In appearance he is thoroughly Brazilian but in character distinc tly British. Engaged By S.O. London Training G.5 500 has had some training in England. Cover Diplomatic.  S.O. Chief Agent in Venezuela. British about 45 unmarried and an old Coldstreamer. Was in Mexico with the Royal utch-Shell group for many years but was transferred to Venezuela as Public Relations officer in 1939 He has established himself under difficult con ditions since a Public Relations officer was something of a novelty and was distrusted on arrival by workers and managementalike. Gives the impression of being a typical stage Englishman but conceals shrewd judgment beneath an almost affected aloof manner. Has quiet drive and a sense of humour. Prefers taking action to writing about, THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL OOCUWIENI RETAINED \ IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 it. Has established his organization with the minimum of fuss and appears to have good leads into all political and social strata.  Engaged By Colonel Vickers. Training Graduated from 'the country'. Cover Oil executive.  G.14 200 S.O. Chief Agent in'Brazil is an old Etonian 36 years of age. Has been many years in Brazil where he has built up a successful business dealing in cattle. Is short with a weather-beaten complexion and wiry build. Appears quiet and slow on first acquain tance but conceals beneath this manner a forceful shrewd and, -5   determined character. He is a good mixer and has a thorough knowledge of the Brazilian character. He would carry out ruthlessly any task to which he was assigned and would not be deterred by odds or consideration of personal safety. He would however take every precaution to ensure that by careful planning risk was reduced to a minimum. He was one of the first S.O. Agents in South America and has a considerable organization in Sao Paulo and Rio which collaborates closely and is indeed partially inter mingled with the S.I. organization. Engaged on recommendations of 75 200 and G.100 Training Has graduated from 'the country'. Cover Cattleman who has been travelling the country for 12 years.   ' . S. GrlA.300 A special S.O. Agent operating in Sao Paulo is 30 unmarried and a Dutch subject. Passing as a disgruntled Dutchman who has made every effort to join his country's forces only to be met with rude and ungrateful indifference on the part of the authorities he has gradually become involved with members of the N.S.B. in Brazil and is now successfully infiltrating the German organization. He is a man of the very highest character and ability and may well succeed in obtaining brilliant results from his difficult and danger ous mission. Engaged On the recommendation of G.140 Training Graduated from the training school where he made an exceptionally good impression. Cover Small farmer of independent means which has been his true situation for 3i years., THIS IS A COPY  ORIGINAL OOCUMEN1 RETAINED -6 -  IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958 l 9. 0.14 4.00 British married 47 years old was an R.A.F. officer in the last war since when he has lived in Rhodesia and for the last five years in Curityba Brazil carrying on his profession of mining engineer. He is actually employed by the Brazilian Federal Govt to travel the region making geological surveys and inspecting mines which position gives him ideal cover for his S.O. work. He has a very complete organization throughout the Southern States of Brazil which is operated in close conjunction with S.I. Engaged On recommendation of 75 '200 and 0.14 200. Training Has'graduated from the training school. \  Cover Mining expert and federal employee.  1/  4i 11. 0.6 000 Chief S.O. Agent in the Argentine is British 60 and married with two sons in the forces. He is alert active and conscientious, 7  and a man who can be depended upon to carry out any instructions to the letter. He is unfortunately better fitted to be the No. 2 man than the Chief Agent of such an important territory as he is somewhat unimaginative and has passed his life in the restricted circle of the British colony in Buenos Aires typified by Hurlingham . Owing to the intransigeant hostility of IP Buenos Aires it has never been possible for S.O. to work with the Embassy. With the arrival of the new IP an improvement in cooperation may be confidently expected. In spite of his handicaps G.6 000 has built up a fairly extensive organization strong in the Capital aid represented in all important provincial centres. He has however showed signs of chafing somewhat at the long period of comparative inaction which our policy has imposed. Engaged On the recommendation of S.O. LONDON Training Has graduated from 'the country'. Cover Long established resident who has a respectable import and  export business.  12. G.11 000 S.O. Chief Agent in Chile British is 32 and unmarried. He is a Coldstream officer who was in France until Dunkirk as P.A. to General Lloyd. since his arrival in Santiago at Christmas 1941 he has done an excellent job havingcreated an organization which includes representatives in every class of Chilean society. Politically his views are leftist and he has established such close relations with the liberal members of the Chilean Government in particular with Sr. Schnake that it is scarcely an exaggeration to say that they make no move without first consulting him. He and his organ ization are prepared for action of any kind that may become necessary from physical operations to political warfare on the highest level., -8-   Engaged On recommendation of the Chief of Combined Operations Training A short interim visit to 'the country'. Cover Diplomatic A.M.A.  13. G.5.100 Is Chief S.O. Agent in Peru British about 40 and. an outstanding organizer. G.5 100 is the only important agent with whom the writer is not personally acquainted hut a study of his work shows him to be a man of considerable ability. The S.O. organization in this territory is the most extensive we have indeed there is no place of importance throughout Peru where G.5 100's organization is not represented. He is primarily a man of action and is ready and willing to cope with any physical emergency from a minor demolition to full scale guerrilla warfare. For the latter he would rely on the A.P.R.A. party with whom he is in close touch and with whose radical opinions he is in sympathy. He has had some trouble with YP wrho looks down on him socially and considers him an alarmist but he is doing everything possible to improve this situation. Engaged On recommendation of Colonel Vickers. Training None his chief assistant G.5 120 had been trained Cover General Motor's agent.  14-G.5 120 A Scotsman age about 43 Somewhat rough about the edges but has a thorough knowledge of Peru and particularly good contacts with the  A.P.R.A. party. Has a strong and slightly bucolic sense of humour. Is critical but on the whole unprejudiced in his opinions. Has roughed it in all parts of Peru and would be well fitted by nature and temper, -9   ament for guerilla warfare based among the mountain Indians. Is also a man of action and like G.5 200 strongly S.O.-minded. Is slightly inarticulate but is quite clear in his own mind. He finds it difficult to realize that his audience is not so wellversed in Peruvian affairs as himself. Is not over patient and may become disillusioned by waiting. This however springs from his boundless enthusiasm for the work and the prospect of action would probably quickly restore his peace of mind. Engaged On recommendation of G.5 100 whose brother-in-law he is. Training Has graduated from 'the country' with exceptionally good  report.  Cover Traffic superintendent of Central Railway of Peru.  15. G.5 200 S.O. Chief Agent in Ecuador about 40 British and unmarried. Manager of the Quito and Guayaquil Railroad and Assistant Press Attache. Is definitely a man of action and inclined to be intolerant of the inaction of others. Expresses himself much better on paper than in conversation. He has accomplished much and has been most successful in undoing the local Axis organizations. He is perhaps inclined to work a little too fast but is probably the most S.O.-minded of all our field agents. Has good contacts in all sections of Ecuadorean life but must be handicapped by the volatility of Ecuadorean politics. Engaged On recommendation of G.5 000. Training Has graduated from 'the country . Cover Diplomatic., June 2nd 1942  G. I. SECTION -NEW YORK G.I. Section was formed in November 1941j for the purpose of collating intelligence and drawing up plans for S 0. operations in Latin America. It soon became clear that because of the anomalous organization of S.I. by which the southern half of Latin America was responsible directly to London and the northern half directly to New York the Latin American in formation contained in the New York S-I-S files was scarcely complete and certainly insufficient for the compilation of detailed plans. It was there fore decided that for the sake of convenience G.I. should summarize all the intelligence relevant to its purposes in files and card-indexes to be kept at the Section's disposal. This was a task of considerable magnitude and neces sitated reading all obtainable S-I-S-and S.Q. files analysing the information contained therein and classifying it under the headings of various agents political personalities organizations etc. in Latin America. Since this material has been completed it has been the aim of the G-I. Section to keep it thoroughly up-to-date. All information concerning Latin American count ries that has passed through the hands of G.I. has been digested and recorded. As a result of this we have approximately 15 000 cards under various count  ries as follows Argentina 2 000 Bolivia 300 Brazil 1 500 British Honduras 25 Chile 1 100 Colombia 2 500 Costa Rica 350 Cuba 650 Dominican Rep. 100 Ecuador 850 El Salvador 400 Guatemala 400 Guianas 125 Honduras 275 Haiti 40 Mexico 1 250 Nicaragua 200 Panama 200 Paraguay 300 Peru 875 Puerto Rico 20 Uruguay 650 Venezuela 700 The following basic reports and files have been compiled and are constantly  being added to Basic Reoorts  Brazil Central America 2, June 2nd 1942  Page 2  G.I. Section -Hew York Basic Reports -cont'd.  Chile The Guianas Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Guatemala Haiti Honduras Latin American oil Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay Venezuela Mexico  Files  The America First Committee  A.P.R.A. Allianza Popular Revolucionaria Americana Argentine 5 Bolivia Brazil 7 Central America Chile 6 Colombia 6 Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic Ecuador 2 El Salvador Falange Guatemala The Guianas -General British Guiana Dutch Guiana French Guiana Haiti Honduras Mexico 6 Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru 6 Rio Conference South America 7 Uruguay Venezuela 5 While this information was being collected various schemes for  S.Q. action in South America were suggested. These were handled almost entirely by F.W.D. personally. He paid several visits to Washington for  conferences at which they were discussed. However it soon became apparent, June 2nd 1942  Page 3.  G I Section -New York  that the State Department was disquieted by the whole prospect of S.0   activities in Latin America. This antagonism sprang from the opinion widely held in the TJ-S.A that Latin America was largely a responsibility of their own and that any outside interference was calculated to upset their plans. S.O. on the other hand held that the State Department was ignorant of the dangers that threatened in South America and feared that it might also persuade the British Foreign Office that conditions in Latin  America were entirely satisfactory. G.I. Section therefore decided to use the intelligence that it had collected and from this information to write a number of convergent reports stressing as far as possible the dangers of Axis activities in South and Central America and thereby to attempt to con vince the State Department and the British Foreign Office that some form of action was indeed urgently necessary.  However it became obvious that no S.O. action would meanwhile be contemplated by the State Department and the Foreign office and indeed they have directed that no such action may be taken. None the less it is believed that the recent hardening of the official American attitude towards South America though coming largely from the entry of the U.S. into the War is also due in some small measure to the various reports written by G.I. personnel and the various conferences at which G.I. was represented.  On the realization that S.O. operations were at least temporarily suspended it became the aim of G.I. to improve and extend its intelligence and its knowledge of conditions within the countries in which S.O. had con templated operations. Thus should active operations ever be called for the material for their planning would be at hand. At the same time it 'was agreed that as S.O. in South America was temporarily in abeyance and as an efficient S-0. organization had already been built up throughout the territory the various regional sections could be used to good effect by providing voluminous intelligence while at the same time perfecting lines of communication etc. within the countries. Thus the various agents and contacts whose duties had been intended to be operational could be used equally well to provide intelligence. They had in fact already proved, June 2nd 1942  Page 4  G.I. Section -New York themselves so useful that it was considered worth while to continue  G.I. Section as an integral part of the S.O. organization confining its activities to the collation of this intelligence and turning it to the best possible use within the limites of its present charter. It would not however be correct to consider G.I. as merely a collator of intelligence received from its representatives in the field since part of its duties has been to supply these representatives with any intelligence that could be obtained from sources other than those local sources with which they were already in contact. Thus many reports from Censorship and other sources have been sent down to the field. Thus the Section has sent out 392 reports to stations in the field as follows  Belize 47 Bogota 73 Buenos Airesl  Caracas 71 San Jose 15 Havana 3 Lima 77 Mexico 12 Montevideo 3 Quito 40 Recife 1 Rio 12 Santiago 21 The intelligence collected by this Section has also been turned to use by those responsible for Economic Warfare and in some cases e.g. in the case of Blohm and Company Venezuela it is believed that intelligence provided has proved to be the final charge that placed the firm on the Black List. Also many reports have been sent to X who has informed our repre sentative in Washington that these reports are extremely useful and he re quested us to continue sending them. From farther afield it is known that one of our reports was used by the British Military Attache in a South American country in his report to London on the situation in his territory. Following is a list of the major reports which have been written by G.I.  XKSSmgSKSSXSMMMXX Report on Colombia Plan for Peru  Italian Minorities in Latin America  S.O. Activities in Cuba, June 2nd 1942  Page 5.  G.I. Section -New York Report on Chile Foianini-Belmonte plot in Bolivia Memo on Paraguay Military Report Political Report on Brazil Possible forms of attack by Argentine against Brazil Hangers to Isthmus of Tehuantepec Political Developments in Argentine since Rio Conference  The Guianas Venezuela German infiltration into Argentine Activities in Pernambuco British Honduras Nazis in San Juan .Argentina Report on Chile Report on Talara & Lobitos Oilfields La Previsora and the Black List Situation in Ecuador Situation in Venezuela The dangers of Central America Report on El Salvador Further activities in pernambuco Report on Santa Catharine Peru-Eeuadpr Settlement Reaction in Ecuador Ortiz's views on Political Situation The Valdivia Case Peru Activities during April Peru-Ecuador Settlement Reaction in Peru Report from Sr. Don Eduardo de Heredia on Bolivia Tofo Iron Mines Axis Agents in Ecuador Axis Agents in Honduras Political Trend in Costa Rica.  These reports have been sent to London. They consist of exten  sive surveys of conditions in the various Latin American countries covered  from as many angles as possibletrade politics strategy espionage etc.  The Section is also responsible for various special reports such as that  on Japanese activities in various South American countries which was  written and handed to the Japanese Section for transmission to London.  Similarly an appreciation of the vital raw materials situation in south  America was especially prepared with the help of the Section by Mr. Edge   worth Johnstone. This is an analysis of the extent to which the Allies  are dependent on Latin American sources for supplies of vital raw materials  with particular attention to the possibilities of sabotage to these materials  by the enemy., June 2nd 1942.  Page 6.  G.I. Section -New York Finally it is hardly possible to differentiate between the functions of G.I. before and after December 7th since the transformation of G.I. from operational intelligence to passive intelligence has been gradual. Indeed G.I. has largely worked in the background and it has not very often been asked to provide intelligence for a stated purpose. Its aim however is to have easily accessible information that would be needed    should it be necessary to provide details on various aspects of Axis and  neutral activity within the countries of south and Central America and to  pass on to interested parties such information as and when it is received  from these countries.  iCh  V  V       r  a, LATIN AMERICAN RAW MATERIALS  VULNERABILITY TO SABOTAGE  Source Processing Storage Transport Services Personnel Plant & Labour  V-. . I'-.- -'.V. ANTIMONY Mexico ' Antofagasta . Labour / Bolivia  /o i-Rly.- -'' . iltrouble  v .Vv  . . BAUXITE B.Guiana River i/Rower D.Guiana Channels V- Plants.7'i Labour.'-  X'-rU'.-P'.- '- - ' ' '/.trouble-.'/ ' W/mm TIN Bolivia 0 Ore-dressing / -Antofagasta' '.-'Power '- . LabourV/ v. Rly.' '0 i 'Plants/' .'--trouble/'. / '  ' . / / . . . .' . Arica-LaPaz'  v  ' ' ' / ' MICA Brazil UlDamage ' - '- ' Few'H -' v.''' - Arg. . by fire' i skilled   & water -- '  overseers  . /.. 'v VANADIUM Peru Z Concentrating -. Central -'RE- ' /Power Labour Plants 7 ..i-.Rly /Plants trouble.  TUN EN Bolivia tAntofagasta.' '/-. 'Labour .U ' /-./trouble Arg. Peru  CHROMIUM Cuba iuWfr Rly jiZYZ. W7777777777Z MERCURY Mexico Flooding Power -. .Plants. '/ . .  . . i ' i PETROLEUM Ven.  -Jlaracaiboi.   V -k' Mexico Refinery-'V . 'Uanks u-V -/ /Hanker '. U ' Power ' Col. . Distillation - service. / Plants /. imits V- -v'-' y///////////// COPPER Chile Concentrating A - . .Plants Antofagasta .Power ///Labour y/v   y ' . iay. r- '.'. -.lines '///trouble/// /Power ' Z i /plants -Pipe--/Vv '.lines..Vv/' BALSA P killed//// WOOD Ecuador . Damage overseers  . by fire -.'. /V-v. .'. Labour troubl / CINCHONA Bolivia  BARK Colombia Labour i/zx Ecuador troubl / 1 Peru  ISAL Mexico r by ZlrevyyyyvZ y/v/////////// . RUBBER Brazil Adulte.ration yo Overseers/z Cent.Am. .fire/iU - - u . ' U' U w/m/m Serious dangers shown thus  Less serious dangers shown thus, CARIBBEAN - OilRefmtnes Recent increases m losses of Allied zhippi. . v Chi Refineries gives substance to many reports of'Ins aes Asphalt in islands-  Sugar  OH Cm se'imi AimasA. VENEZUELA Large German Colonies in the. C   principal towns Bauxite Plants . COLOMBIA  G'\U AkfA /\ l'ri t rtloQ Stindtm /ItinieirmJs xWni' W/. Hides  O  Oil  H vifv V. Oif Balsa mood .  Cinchona Rapoh. OoayaguyBf CUAOOR SS Bedm- J  /Pm rtrrtins Talara L Controlling Japanese Influences Natal  Lange German  SO 000 Ua wnei in Pe Colonies and Recife  Commancto Intenet 3 /L  thimh 4. E AU Chromium Castor Seed  m ngr especially Pnttrnonu manganese Cottons Lead Mica Italian influenced in Lima Silk  Mercury QuarU Rubber  Molybdenum Titanium  Vanadium Hides Violfrom Fats  Iron Copper Diamonds Meat t // 7/ t V/A Antimony Cinchona Copper . 7// ' Wolfram TocapiUo PR RAGURY 50 000 Japanese N-. meat /ffiffiffi's.  Santos organised and armed in   ' Jbnning rAAmURat. Sao Asolo and Santos area. Chonora PsuncuJim Mm Also Strong Italian Interest. i Si w  Carman centra 50000 Germans in Sao Asolo in States 4-\ Mistones Gotfit m .  Mere than 900.000Germans m  Copper 4 Entre. Hi  hto/ybdenum States of Rio Gmndt do Sul hbtrotcs A R G E M T I N Meal Pttrana and S. Cathanna Iodine meat Hides yARioOmnde  Hemp URUGUAY V  Casan Qp Fats Wolfram G igcenne 150 000 Germans in Buenos Ares Avvmce  Linseed Tanning 500 000 Italians m Buenos Aires Wool Bahiat and many more in States of B.A. and RoSdrio. Strong in Montevideo ValdiviaW Very strong German Colonies AH Chile South of Valdivia under Industrially vital PowerPlants A German control Frigorif/cos.X German Japanese Italian Control or Strong Influence Influence Refuelling Based Existing -fbss'ble . i In. 1.il bf, PRODUCTS AVAILABLE FROM SOUTH AMERICA The continued supply of which is vitax to the United Nations.   1. ANTIMONY 50% of U.S. import requirements come from Bolivia.  2. BAUXITE 60% of U.S. consumption almost 100% of British Empire .  consumption comes from the Guianns.  3-BERYLLIUM 50% of U.S. requirements come from Brazil and Argentina.   4-COPPER 35% of U.S. consumption comes from Chile. j  5-LEAL' 10% of U.S. consumption comes from Peru and Argentina.  .  6. MANGANESE 33% of U.S. consumption comes from Brazil. 7. MICA Certain categories of sheet Mica come from Brazil  where production is being increased ten-fold. 8. NITRATES All U.S. imports come from Chile. 1---- 9-OIL 7d0 000 barrels daily come from Colombia and Venezuela of which 500 000 are refined in Curacao and Aruba. The United States would find it hard to replace this refinery capacity.   10. RUBBER 20 000 tons yearly come from South America chiefly the Amazon basin production is being rapidly increased to 50 000 tons yearly. This represents the greater part of world supply still available to the United States.  11. TIN 50% of world supplies still available to the United States come from Bolivia.  12. TUNGSTEN 50% of United States imports come from Bolivia which produces about 25% of world supplies still available to the United Nations. j   13-VANADIUM 45% of United States requirements come from Peru.  14. BALSA WOOD 100% of total world's supply comes from Ecuador.  15. CINCHONA BAM 100% of world's supplies which are still available to the United Nations come from Bolivia and Peru. 16. HIDES AMD SKINS Substantial part of United States requirements come from Argentine and Uruguay.  Irreplaceable and essential to the war effort., , S.O. . H VToity  FILE NUMBER SUBJECT HISTORY 42 AMERICA VOLUME Summary of Events Early 1941 and July 1942 US Office of War Information FROM 1942 TO, It ' i 'fwtt 19  ' . Ptb  t vrfie- .-p I v t./.r. . .1r-5 to r The Diyiaion of ths Office of War Information ia the only  teorlcan organIs&tlon davoted to politioel warfare. It h&u groro rapidly  raider the dtiwetion of Mr. .Robert E.SH3HCKJD tte noted Air rlean playwright  &nd its puhlicatiOBs seotloa is htaiily mm-agmi In tnmiag out all foxtMi of  printed propaganda tram leaflets to such dariees as mteh-fol i fs and  p tagos of soap eaeh bearing its appropriate tea-icfen -m&mgs.  This import is a mmmty of th events between tfas h gimSjig of 1941  asad July 1942 whm a situation was reaahad la which SO were excluded froa  aontact -with Mr SaarwoorPs organisation. Thi-3 eoataet in sffaet. maomtod  to oocitrol over an organisation which directs all foras of Issericiis propagasda  to abroad -Is will be detailed later it also mamba to a suwoary of the  rise and fall.of British influaacis in Allied political warfare.  Political warfare fro tae WCetem BaBisptor was first alerted in  January 1 11 by officers of British Security Coordination.  Its basic principle was that the vole af m mutr l latsriss carri i  infinitely nore weight with the peoples of Barope than tbs voice of a belli    ersnt England 8.2. condenn&tlan of lAVai for iiurtanoe would carry far  nor anight than any aaoaat of wordy criticisa pcs the 8.B.C.  But throughout the whole of the Baited States no shortwave stations  w m broadcasting the voice of Astaricn to Burej A little i'jiewB ntatiae in  SgtffcMI In ' 'WWKIL was carryingtveadeastewith Chrisfciin Seiettee  aesaag and it was known that this station could be heard in Europe. 411  other shortwave stations wars engaged aainly In r&mtixoh as a ssedit for  testing new apparatus., 2  Shortmnro broado ats tterefor had ta b erganiawd. At the s 2 tlB ths utaoat o ve bad to h t ken o that no on not wen the U.S. enthoritiss oouli J-v r. that thnse hroadeasts ware Britiah-inSylred. This ilesanded delleate negotiations and. a &jstm working throaghm involved ana e&rafully-organissd series of cutouts. It was obviously the work of a secret organisationc  liADXQ  A start was a ie with iflDL over which station daily hroadeaats were sarganised is Trench and Ge ian. The effect of Vmm hoPoadeaBts c their European lietoncrs was shown at oncenot so isuch by listonars reports m by the very evident eanoyanee of tfe knmea authorities who first-ettaeked tML on their own radio ma banned Christian Selene as a religion in Qersraty an obvious pioso of retaliation Shortly afterwards when Biattsrs were nearing a crisi botweee Britain and the fiehy tmthnrltiee la Syria m appeal ms received fra Iiomion for similar Asrrleaa teroadmgt to the Hear -feet. A whole sarlee of hraed easts were orgonlmd Mft fllMi daily at. the Saar Sa t The iM aages ineiuded Classietu Arabic Turkish Egyptirsa and. French. The Arabic sactioa of FiE sent regular e apHnefet ass tha tone and . eentnat of thoae broadcasts ami. during th oacup--tioK ef Syri& by British troops broadcasts of WR3L undoubtedly pLayed a part is inflneneiEp the Syrleae in our favour.  It was however during thu Tugoalav llov OTK t crisis In the. spring of 1941 that political warfare Justified Itself a. an extrosely powerful iait perfectly flwciblo weapon. It will be rwieasbored that Gcrsssny had ad  certain -Iweamls m wimt was regarded as a pro-G aa Tugoalew Govemervit whose Foreign Miaiater was '.mdoubfeedly a tool ef the Axis. Although ths Serb popu  lation at least was known to ba predofsinantly re-British rrevions wtamplos  had shown only too clearly that similar CMemn 4mmni on stellar GcvsmswHSte ted achieved their aim in spite of crti-G-mwi foalleg among the txjpulstlonr.., 3 In an attaiipt to aueoasd share all other British attasapts had failed lijgosiaT hroadoaata were nxvmgM over TOOL. After two week the /'u-ericac Hlaiater in Bair-Tade cabled to the State Department notif/ifig the latter that the hroadeasts were toeing listened to widely. The broadcasts were i cri- .secl fro five tines weekly to once daily twice daily and 3ji the height of the crisis to five tines daily. These broadcasts undoubtedly san as a tiraeiy id to Colonel DWXy/M who was then in Tugoslsvia The diplanatic end public preewire brought to bear through thess two respoetiv cheneele were the decidinr fnctor in swinging Yugoslavia to the side of the Aliie .  -ngrm.TfJKCs  Keaatina through the roso-urcos of SIS a existent eri of reports was seat lio-se m ths state of aasra-le inside Europe. Refugees by the ibous&aa were arriving in the festers Bsiaisphare. As & neutral country Anerisa was still in postal coaaauaic&tim with &rop Tm sources were tappet so that it was possible not only to act ea m iateHigwce branch for 'iaiitioai warfare kit to cany act direct political warfare in a Banner that was not possible free Britain itself.  So imioh however are mrely ths highlights of ths work in organisis-ipolitical airfare fraa the lesteani Hmi heve. By the mmn&r of 1941 broedcaets ted been organised in thirteen languages. A syetera of spreading rusours into Europe ted been sat up in meh a fashion that rumours could ba iTlented in  iiq--Earopeaa eoiatry within twety-four hours.  tea of the moat effective ways of influencing the acplns of Europe is to appaei to then through their respective alacrities in the United States Tte BuBgariaas for axasinla are such raor likely to he predisposed to e idea if ths Hungarian-Aaiericiins appeal to tte to accept it. lsay Eurcpean Govemaehts aspecielly those of Germany Italy Bungary Csschoelovakis and Bulgaria, 4  Iwara devote wch tla and effort to organising. their aineritleg in the United  Jt&tes in order to be aMa to influ-wco Aacrican pablie opinion. The devsio  B nt of aoiitieal wurfar la tbs ifastum B sr i ph r thsrefore ere t d the idea  that this proobas f in.f].oaneing publie pinion ni i ht wall b reversed.  T . r e Renjr tboosaada of foreign laajp3i g nmaptipaars in the United States. To apim aeh oaoU one oftfeMi seperatelj was iapraetiesl and wild have threatened to expose my British rganiaatlost engaged in aoeh onfitiential work. A easier notbod wa to work tlsroi fe eone mma ageney which eaprlied tbeee n paper with their news. Bat a s eh news agency ineieted. Sfosti of those -nbiieatioB with the ese iyfcios of those paid by the e e y ted m funds available far subscriptions to a. a - e.g ncy. After eoeo enquiries a eowparatimly hseure news agency was discovered and control was obtained over it. This mw agency was eneouraged to send its tsedlatins to the foreign langncge press To increase the prestige of the agency  earespoadsnts were fo 4 far it la .the priaelpd mm centres of the worM CsizOf Lisbon. Moscowf etc. farthnsacre a staff of mmmm nm mplcyed is the 3 w Tcrh offiees of SOI to write np in the torn of news stories gash inferart-ion as eo id he reXwuMtd for --tthUcstioo by British Security coordination. The aouree of thsse stories not team to the mm agmey whom only contact with XJ1 was through a cutout but which reoeived frc this nan a conatant flow of luair9B news stories  mnmti &a wholly true 3S tS a owsistiiif of ruwoure which mg wished to circulate aoiaeti.- 0 efintaining laformstiaa on which the British Cevernaent wished action to be tslum hot. which could not be released officially By the mmw of 1941 this news agency ted a virtual woBopoly of the foreign language arms. Only the paid ll i organa F ainmt as a body oatsid its orbit ad even here skilful handling -of releases were eonetiaKts sueeesaful in -ioceivin thaw aditors into innoewRt .. blieation of w which was known to  he eabiuwwssinf to tit tkmmn Goverrunent. fte above in tarlaf outline is the history of political mrfars In Amerioii up to thn mmme of 1941. Is a on it had shews itself capable of, fer-jM&ching remits said m organisailoa had beea deyeloped which i-squirad tb work of m'ysrti.i-3 section of British Saeurity CaapitetitiffliB a wuolo host-of oatsido g ts soaiaets and Istwraodierioa In 3m 1941 tho tesrioan Mslnisitratioa girdud itself for war vith tha appoiateont of Colon Donorsn m Coordlastor of InforaatxcMi e&rryiR . with It mows othw things r spon lMlity for the or isatioh of political Marfar  on bohslf of tha U.S. ClorenweBt fhis ms a 4wwel i' t at f ar r hin siipaifleaBSO wbieh mst readily   ptreoi .t 4 hy thos roapowlM far diresting politioel warfare in the Uait d Ststos oh. behalf of Grsat bet which wag sot roadlly approoiUtwd in Britain itself. It is aocassftxy to dwell on this mm% as perhaps its ianortaaoe is still not fully rsalised t ham Politieal voxfmro is siaod t the aisde of peoples as distinct Srm tfesir bodies and ife exploits of ths snoayis politieal warfare e Bpai B hiars ehown it to be Just as iaporteni a weapon is rao'em warfare as the othsr sendoos. Timm is this dlffarsoes howsrer  that wbaareas the paoplss will cease fighting at the m& of tofftilittM their aiad will oontiiiao to foaction sloag the lisas which political warfare has aecustoned ti to think la other wards the peacafetae rosettloaiaBt of the wcrM will fee according to the doctrines instilled Into ths isi -3 of the people during the war lowtheA -iriea aarenot as are apeople skilledin themy of worM polities. fewer in their history tore they boos aeaustoned to an SIS or as S51 they will nrofeahiy mver.snooeed la developing the elite organisations that Croat ritais has feuiii np Bat. toerleane iw a iastiaotiwa flair for politieal warfare and crofeaeiewse upon whieh political warfare draws scat easily ivsr its recruit are tmmg the highest paid is the country. In Britain propaganda la tbs Cinderells of all wartiso oocapatioosi it is frowned tr oa. regaraad with sassa eusplolon end 'm% off fron the intinato eonfl lenee of ttioss directing the war. In tfe United atates a can be too highly paid to belong to political warfare Furth-vrcior-imericane hare eas&ethinf. to sell Ttey s the lead of, d fsocr&8/ of oompiate i reodoss for all paoplo . In fact they hava a al plos diraet lina which oowl oasily bacone soat Mtbarraaain to tb British Bespi .   BroadaakSts to ths Fhillipines camiot b owifln d to the FilliplKo for cnsylw thay my also bo hoard in Malaya Buraa and India. To simplo kIbus frowdoa for th Flllipinoa 8ana frdog for th. Indians tha Buraeae and the Malayan tha M e sort of freedom. If a eat bos kittoM in the ores ym do not call thas Msoaits m& fraedoc usaas freote idv rwver you find it. Finally with all its &r t wasith of r sour f l t&lt nt fin tneial baokiag md natural ability th United States mm isowitatly bound to outstrip six its lilies ia tto dirsetioo of politie&l warfare v LieAsors alone ccald sot sontrol suob a powerful aesMae. Control had to be astedliohnd ia the begiBniag -nd aust be a&iataiaod through raoual relations built up over a pariod of tlfite  Colonnl SkMumn pdneed Mr. Gheerwooi ia char of Ms political werfere ergmlm&lm. and the personal eontaot mss established &t once. Mr. Sherwood had no staff very few ideas azvd no plan of argsnieatioa The whole of the political cntrfsre organ aation. deseribod in the earlier part of this report handed or r to Mr. uherwooti over a period of sene souths. . To establish his foraipi oatjoste lar Shsrwood relied alaost eos. lately an the adrloe and assistance of those British officials who had prswiously directed this effort. A an organisation BSPitish Seearlty Coordination played a major port in teiWing up the ibasrlcaa orgsMaatian which was not without Its cam dosrastic difficulties. It too had the suspicion of tte State .epeartwent which raailaad dimly that ia some way xjlitic warfare would have an affect on the post-war world Attempts war node ry curtain AaericaE officials to .-stifle Str. Sherwood's arganisation before it oowla. assart itself. Its eomaanicatians  which had to be rorited via State DeparteoBt channels ware told up in son casas the right to send ca l a -ms eni d to it it received ra directives on the lines of Aaozlean policy officers appointed to the werious outpoat offices found difficultlaa in transport. Ttoee and winy other ..iifficmlties which occurred sltsost daily would  tore killed Mr. Sherwood's organiaatiOD in its youth tot for tha rssistance, -7   gltm by Brltisli Swjwity t oordir. tion. Tto latter acted its the soli ehannol of apsueicatlons is etises soar Mr. Shervvootl contra & t 4 difficulties with tbs Stat Dapaarfcasot. It wotted his recruits irsiaol the irenspoarted ihets to the field where It ir l .e d Wtom la toucfe. with ttelf ra p cti e British officials rao re requested to assist them. .tod la the broadcastlag field it went so far m to give JSr. Sherwood xjlicy directiwes which ii could not ohfcaie frae Ms ows'St t De ta at 14 arrsngad the r hre lesstlaf fef ite B.B.C of shartware prognmaes It sbuh ImI imxariuam pesgdOets sod devices irato Spai am fortts sl. It septov vlsed the ergsniseticai of polltieel awRCare to the Per last drew up oil iaeriess paphlots for droppiag behtod J&p&mm lines aud m Tokyo Itself. Is siaple wards Britaia ns 4ir tiag the taterieto pbliiloel warfare orgaaimtioB. Meeatiaa dose p&emmX oooperatloo had been astshUehad whieh we rt far l- 7ond tto aoeoiag of the word iia .so 'So mom& of linlmti eorild replaoe the relation which had heoa established. Bar this report reaefes a stage whore it is difficult to deaerlbs erects factually siae tbs persons rosjxmsifelss for thtm r not iiaww. Britain Political tsrfaro 2 catiwe ms ssximts to stsMish its own reper t .tioB abroad. British Security Cocardlsctios bad repeatedly urged that IVor tins-to tiiB sciteblo PfS srpsrta should rieit the 'Suited States whers they eould assist those British official engaged is aoegasratloB with the Sherwood organlsetioa. This point of slow ms ale swpreaB d to Sr Bwrid. W SS-LW1 wh B fee arcd.vad in the Baited' States is the early suaner of l%2 m & special alealee for FW. it the swne ttmf it was pointed out to Si . Bewws-Lyo that in tfee opisi of thoao British officials the political warfare effort could not be divereed fro the rescuroas of SIS and 301 whieh had proved so TaluaMs art only to S at hws bat t the Sherwood organisation as well. It was fait thrt the aaMtloss of FIS sm4 the nc-sds of political war fare could test te s rvad by expanding tte politicsl warfare .wetijns of 'jritish, a Sseurity Coordby giving this soot.i Mi ftiapKratr-status flrom 30K of wM.eb It had toraarly tormd part fend by olaclog it in dtroct toaoli with PUS iaatoad of nalng SOE in I-onaoi. as a .nostboac. this a u e tioa m not only agreoabi to Hr. .b rwood tot ima m-gmi by ill's in several scsEsuaications. larartbalss Mr. Bwea-J wn r ort advlfiad the craation of an autommoud Mi mission entirely divorcsd Crow th control of British Ssoority Coordination Tbs objections to this sera pointed owt .t once to If Bo- es- Lym Lena of eontrol by British iocurity Coordinitios would cmsoi that must also renounce all responsibility for PWE eGtirltias te the Wast-em ii i ph re and ocaiM no .ledger take pert in then This dcnOd mm that the proposed P S ffiissiosi would to cut off frm ttm sources of secret information which were re garded as its lire-tolood that ell connection totweon B 6 C. sad thw Shsrsood  rfwsiaatioft uet to dropped that the slops personal cooperation hnllt up ower h period of tiae snst also be dropped and that thus CSreat Britfetn stood in dsofe'-r of losing control orer the rapldy-eJsjjai-sdiK.c jmviiwx polltie&l twrferc effort. ' last aiaute efforts sera nude to resciy the sitnation by Mr. MEOV D JTL R nawly eppoisted Mrecfcar-Onsewsl of Xafoxantlon Serrlees is the United States and by Mr. Sherwood hirasalf. la & tdapraa to tte Minister of Information in July 1942 Mr. Butter urged that the British political warfare orgnoisatioa i ths BMLted States should not ba disloe tad by the appointment of a ssw Etesian tot that the representntiee should be left in the bands of Security Coerdiaatlon mxpuading this if necessary Alarmed t losing contact with those officials with whoa to tod establistod snieh clooo .tents of coop ration Mr. Sherwood took up the matter with ids own chief Mr. EysER MTIS and ar. Daria eaUed ths Anarleen Minister in London asking ten to urge on the Minister of Xnfometlon that no change shcaM bs asde to tto eodatingt ermneenaats. Thas efforts hawever eppear to tors eons too late for szv g eM ts for ths osiahltebmnt of tto new E nission want ahead without Isterruption. Tto dangers which B.S.C. pointed out night acoMpaay sr-jch dcralorsi tits tore, 9  i  c  elread/ beooae fact. 35'. E now haa cli.r ct Iisisen wiita thw Sh&rwowX arg&uisatiwj   ttv-t sad nothing er . Control buis bs n lout Tiw GhevuraoJ azg&nisatioil still hna its .hilly difficulties os in th esse of Mr. Stanley but it will solve these is its own a&y. T v oonplsto rwlibnce on lrit6.in he.a uis&ppoarod snd with it the expiate control by Britain Finally because of the long-torsi iR jort nce of toliticai warfare it is the opinion of tbs experts writing this report that as a result of ifa change in the handling of political warfare Great Britain no. stod in grave d sf r of losing the peace or at the vary least of having a decisive voice la peace councils. Arerriesn political warfare has faosose a flood which is now sweeping into the doaiaioas of the Ssplre itself. it tte tin af writing there la by sany iiss s aoro iaerieen propagand in Canada South Africa Australia and R rw Eealsiid thar is British proim ade.  That simple direct bat so potentially aagermw seed of iaerican propaganda is haing scattered over this eti r tuad in p pblots &ad oater-s esong the peoples of Surspe ami the far last. To those except experts it way take  months before the growth of that seed baeoraa eppersnt but it will cartainly be firmly rooted befttcw the Allies sit round vietarinus p e table., Vo .  iff   .C' .Y .u. th v. . 3 -ItriiiiOB Y 1 . - -Y.r Ii-'cr' tt'oil ni l .4n. no xcftr-ji  a . to a l.i .ru-i - on tn '-3 33-u.a Cfc i of .Yn The 0v n fi8 Division of fcho Offie of War Infoimition ia th only tatmtmm orgatiisatlssr denrotad to politlosl varfara It has grows rapidly under the direction of Mr. Robert .SMRUOOD tbs noted tearioaa playwright and its publioatioar. aaciioa is busily in tnxttiiig out all forces f printed propaganda from loafiats to such davices as mtch-folders and. packages of soap a&ch bearisf its epproprlst tearicim seeaag . -   This r x rt ia a mmmv of the evants betwwin the begianliig of 1941 andJuly1942 whanasituationmsranchedinwideItSOSwear sxeludod-frcei oontsict with Mr Sherwood sorgan1 M.b oaotaet in effect Mounted to control over m organiaation wMch directs all forms of Amricaa propaganda to abroad. As will be aotailad later it also mmmt to a raamry of the rise and fall of British influence in Allied poUtieal warfare. Political warfar from iha Mwtdw Reaispiiarss was first started in January 1941 by officers of British Security Coordination.  Its1 basic principle was that tha voice of a nMitral Aearioa carried infinitely raor weight with tli people of Stemp then tha voice of a belligarent England. H.3. oond xsftti m of Laval for instance would carry far are weight than mj aocuat of vordy criticisn frooi the 8 B.C. But throughout the whole of the United Statee no shortwave stations n were broadcasting the voice of Amaelm to lurope. A little kaoMa stetion in Boston known as WRBL was eaxryiEig broadsiauta -sfith & Chricti&n Science aesaag and it was known that this station could be heard in 'Surop . AH other slsortwcv stations wars engaged mainly in research as a medium far teatlag aww apparstus., 2  Shortwave nroadcasts thor fore had to toe organlswd. At ttoa mum tiiae the utaost owe bad to bo taken so that no on not even tba \1 S aut.borittoa eoalb learn that t se broedsast . mm BritiatHinsnireu. ' Tbl d aiwi d dolleate negotiations and ft uyaiom TOCkiBf through ftt Involvaa and car fally-orgaai d series of cutouta It wa obviously the work of a soflswt organisatiem. R&21Q  A atari & da it SEUL over which station daily broadcasts -cere organises in reneh mA Qmmm The affect of th troadoastc 00 their Earopsait liatsBera ms shows at once  not so aeh by Iigt ners r&p&rts m by the very svident ma&fmm of the Qmmm mtt&riti&s who first attaekod  91 on their can mdlo aad bemaad eferisii&a Scianea as a religl in Gammyt m ohviom pie af retaliation Shortly afterward afen miters mv mstirng ft crisis bate Britain and tte 'il&hj aathovitlas is Syria n nppml was received trm Lendon for similar Jnsrlean troadenstB to tbs Wo&r 'last A whole series of broad .easts were organised and alasad dally at lbs Seer Bast. Tt Imgita ctt inolniod Claasioftl Ar .Me Turkisti Egypties and Fsmieb. Tbs Arabic section of FM sent rogul&r os the tone sod content of these broadcasts and duriag tie omopation of Syria by British troop broadcasts of SEOL mdcabtedly played a part in influencing the SyrUm in cor favour It was hoavivsr ferteg the Xug.raJuw Qm rmmt crisis is tt spring of 1941 tbst political wurfo's justified iU if as sb cslrcntsly powarfb bet rj rf ctiy flotibis mmpm. It will m y wh r d ths.t Gwmny hs.d nade certain tkmanda m shat ms regarded as a pcn-Oenaan Tugoslav G&rmmmt whom Foreign Minister was oadenlitedly a tool of tba Axis Altboagh the Serb -opaj- Iisiion at laast wm known to 'be dorsimuitly prs-ttPltlsb pr&rlms examples bad shown only too clearly that slailar Osrmn eUmenda on similar Gonrernaeats ted scliiavod their aim in spit of mti-Oaemn f'oeliog amang tfea ropfolations, -3-  In mi attempt to mootmd where all other British attempts had fallod lugoslaT hroadoasts ware arranged over WROL. After two waa s the AinarimB Minister in 3al nide cabled to tha State Deport ant notifying tha latter that tits broadcasts wara being listauad to widely. The broadcasts sera ineranaed fro fiv tines weekly to onoe eiaily twice daily mad in thw height of tha erisia to fir timas daily Ttea broadcasts undoubtedly can as a timely aid to Coloaoi DOJ50MJ who was than in TugosleTia. The diploaetie amt public prewaure brought to bear through the two respective channels ware the deciding factor in swinging Yugoslavia to the si la of the Allies. Meantime through the resources of SIS a constant sarles of reports was sent basso m tbs state of mr&l inside lump .. Refugees by the thauMad were arriving in tha Westarr Bcwdsphsre. As a asutral eotsjtry America mm still in postal aassssileatla with Europe. These source were tapped so that it was possible not oily to act sn intelligence branch for political warfare bat to carry out direct joiitieai warfare in a manner that was not possible fro .i Britain itself. So siach however are merely the highlights of ti work in organiainr political warfare trem th Western Hnslsphere. By tho siwssr of 1941 broad casts had twon orgenisod in tMrtosr languagea. A system of sprsadiag rmow into Suropo had basn sat up in such a fashion that rumours could be planted is ssf uropeca eouatry within twwty-fowp tours. momijmmmm On of the n 3t defective ways of isflusneinr tfao peoples of lur j'pe is to appeal to them through their respective ninoritisa in the United States. The iiunpnriens for exmapl are much more likely to be predisposed to an idea if ths liuBRarisn-Awricana appeal to them to accept it Hany Suropoan Governneats especially ti ss of Gertaany Italy Bunpary Cseehoslowskis and. Bolgaris, hwva devotevJ sueh ti end effort to orgnnlslag their csinoritlas in the ilnltod States in ord. r to be abis to infiuone Aserioars publie opinion The want of politieal warfare in th Western ikaeicpbere therefor omitted the idea that this proeaas of inflwsneing .-ublic opinion eight well be rwrereed. There are many thousands of foreign language newspapers in the letted States. . To e-'g-roaoh saeh one of t&w seperatnly was iiapraetical and would hair threatened to expose any British .-rganisetlan engaged in such eeskfideetlal work An easier nethod was to sort through sons news agency which supplied tbum nenspapera with thsir mm But ne such am& agency exJ sted. Sect of these publications with the exception of those paid V the aneisy M& iso funds arailable for sohecsriftiona to a n 8 ssgeaey. After s a an oiries s par itivaly cimeiu o mm agmsy was .di oovared and eoatrol was obtained over it. This news agency was etaeouraged to send its toiletins to the foreign langnage press. . To increase the prestige of th egeney eorreaoo 5d Kt s were feraad for it in the principal news centres of the world Cairo Lisbon Boeeow etc. Ptsrthaira&r staff of newsssen was amploysd in the Sow Tcartc sffie a of SOI to write up in the fore of news stories sash iaforaation as could he released for pahlleatlon by British Security Coordinutl ji. .Ths source of these stories was not known to th twm agency whose only contact with SOS was through cutout s teat which raoelwod from this aa & omafomt flow of n 08 stories  soaeti--as wholly true gomtims ooasisting of rwowrs which FHB wished to eireulate. janstlswas eontainln infomatioa on which th British GorartMent wished action to be taken bat which could not be released officially. By the soaaer of 1941 this mm agency had & virtual acnopoly of the foraiga Im oe.ge press Only the paid Baal organs ranained as a body outedde its orbit and eweti ter skilful handliaf of releases were aoaefciae snccessfol i deeeiwing those editors into Isooemt ubllc&tloB of news which was known to be cmb&rrtkmine. to the Gerraan Goverosant. The above ii brief outiia 0 the history f political warfare in Aseriei . up to the aiaauer of 1941. As a wee on it had shown Itself capable of, 5   V--   far-raacMng raawlta and an organisation had b HWi devolo ] which rwqvsired the work of separate aoetion of British Soourity Coordias tioii and a m'mle host of outside agenta contacts and intarstediariaa.  In 3vm 1941 tfa Aaerieen Administration girdod. itself for war with the appointment of Colonel Donovan as Coordinator of Infonssation earryin with it Kffiong other things rcaponsibility for tbs organisation of political war fare on tehalf of the U.S Govsmmfmt.  This was a development of far-reaching significance which was readily appreciated by tfaoie responsible for directiar political warfare in the Baited States on behalf of Great Britain hat which was not readily appreciated in Britain itself. It is necessary to dwell cm this event as perhaps its importance is still not fully realised at haras.  Political warfare is aimed at the isinig of peoples as distinct txm their bodies and the exploit of the political warfare campaigns have shown it to be nst as important a weapon in modem warfare as the other services. There is this difference however  that whereas the-peoples will cease fightin at the and of hostilities thsir minis will contlaee to function along the lin s which political warfare h&e acmistomed them to think In ether wards the peacetime resettlemeot of the world will be according to the'doctrines instilled into the min a of the people during the war.  How the Jasortoaajs ar not a e are a people skilled in tu ways f world politics. Sever in thair history have they been eccustomed to an SIS or an SOBj they will probably never succeed in dev lopim-the elite organisations that Groat Britain has built up. But Aiaericcjis teve a Imstinctivs flair for political warfare anti professions upon which political warfare draws stoat easily for its recruits are among the highest paid in the country. In Britain propaganda la the Cinderella of all wartime occupations it is frowned upon regarded with some smopiolon and certainly shut off from the intimate eonfiience of those directing the war. In the United States so man can b too highly paid to belong to political warfare.  Furthermore Americans have ithing to sell. They are the land of, -6   d Bo r .e7j of ec Kpl te tmadow for all paopla . In fact thoy hava a atffipla direct lifts which could easily boecasa Boat e b srrassisg to th British Empire.  Broadcasts to the hillipiiKsa camjct be eonfin d to the Fillipirsos for e &ffiplej thsy raay also bo hfas.rd in Malaya Burma and India. To simple Binds freed for the Flllipinoa maims freedoB for th Indians ih i Burass and th Malayans  the s e sort of frasdmu If a cat tea kittens in the oven you do not call then 'biscuits and freedom sasana freedom wherever you find it. Finally with all its great wealth of resourceful talent financial backing and natural ability tha United Statas was iarritably bound to outstrip all its Allies in the direction of political warfare Liaison aloe could not control such & powerful a&ehine. Control ted to be established in the beginning and awst be miat&inad through peraonal relationl built zp over a period of tine Colonel Donovan plaeod Mr Sherwood is charge of his political warfare organisation and the perscajal contact was established at once. Mr. Sherwood had bo staff vary few ideas and no pdas of organisation. The whole of the political warfare rga-iiaation deseribed in tm earlier part of this report u tended owwr to Mr Sherwood over a period of 4c w montes. To establish his foreign outposts iSr Stemosd rcliad alaoet  oeiijletely cm th advice anti assistance of those British officials who ted pre viously directed this effort. as an orgSRisefioa British teeurlty Coordination played a &jar pert In buildlag up the Aaariesn organisation which was act without its own dooestle difficulties. It too ted the suspicion of th State Dapisrtnent which realised disly that in mm mj political warfare would tevs m affect ob tte post-war world. Attempts were mad by eerteis Aasrioais officials to atiflo Sr. Sfautanraod's orgaidsation before it could assert itself. Xte csbbBunicstior. s which ted to be routed via State Departw t channals ww held up in seas cases hha right to serai cables w . lenied to itj it received no directive on the linea of Anarlsan policy officers appointed to the various outpost offices found difficulties in transport. rhea and many other difficulties which occurred altsest daily would have killed Mr. Sherwood s organisation in Its youth but for the assistance,  . 7   giT by Britiab Security CoordiaftioR. Tb lattar acted as the soi s ab aa l of eafsKBsioatioas in eases mb&rm Mr.. Sherwood c-vatew iated diffic itio with the State Bepartiseot. It wetted his recrulta trsiaed fcbes. transportad ih to the field wher it placed ther in touch with their rsapeotiye British officials who mr requests1 to assist thos. ted ia ths broadcastla. field it we t so far m to give Mr. Sherwood policy directives wMdi he could aot obtairs frw his own State Bapartment. It arrenged the rebroadeauailxsg% the B.B.C of .dsorieaa Bhoftimve pregranees. It smuggled tauariem pssphlets aad devices Into Spate sed Partugsl it supeiv vised the orgaaisation of politic wfare t the Per last draw mf ail teerican. panphleta for teoppisg behind Japsusas liaea and on Tokyo it-sslf. Ir. sSapl words mm directing the tesrlews peUtisai w rf r arg nlsatloQ. Maaattee close peraonal ceop ratioa had besa eatabltehed Meh want r beyond the aaaniag of the ward liaison W aaoaat of liaison could replaes the rcistioas which had mm establtehed Hare this report reaahaa a stags where it Is diffieu.lt to describe events faeiiselly since the parsons rMpcnsible for tbm are not kmam Iritate'e Pelitieel Warfare assertive was emxlms to ostahlieh it own repfeewstatioo abroad BHiish Sec .rrity GoordlRation had repeatedly urged that froo tins to ti c saitahle PH experts shouM visit Urn Halted States where tbay eould assist thom Brltiah sffiei&ls engaged te ow paratiea with the Sherwood organisation. This point of view was also erpreaa-id to Hr. David whas h arrived i the Halted States in the early Bmmr of 19 2 on a special s'seion for THE. It the seas tte it was pointed onfc to Hr. Bowes-lyon that la the opinion of those British officials the political warfare effort eonld not b divorced froi the reaources of SIS and. .505 rtdeh had proved m vaiiabl not only to FJSS at bans tat to the b r co i.orgsEisatic sa well  It was felt thst the aabltioa of PS and the weeds of political war fare could best b served by espnadlng the political wrfare motim of British, S'saarlt Coer41n tlo by flving this s oti j tmp&r&te sti-ias frm 80S of which it had formerly format part and by piecing it in direct touch with PWS iuata&d of using SOS in London as a postbox. This suggestion was not only agreeable to Mr Sherwood teifc was urged by Ma in sovaral cossamicatlm Mflnrarthslass Mr. r r ort dvis i ths ermutioo of an autoa yus PS1 mission entirely tlirorcnd fror tl control of British ioeurity voordin jtio u The objoetioag to this were potntod .out t once to Mr. Boses Lyon Loss of control by British iecurity CoordtoatioB. would mmm that B S.C Bust also renoune all. responsibility for P 1 astliritiea i the Besteni UmisphBre and oould no Ifsru.-er take rt in the . This would mm ttet the proposed WE ssiesion would fee e fc off free tte saurees of secret isfaBmttoa wMcfe were re garded as its life-blood that all eonaeofeion between and the Sfearseoa orfwaisstieii mmt be ctrof ecl that the oloeo p&gmml coopsrati m feoilt up orar a p rtLoa of time mast also fee dropped sad that thus Great Britaia stood 1b danger of lasing eomtral sw the rapj iy-eopuadlxif imericsu peiitiesl warfare effort. Last-miauta efforts ware sad to remedy the sttastioa fey Mr. BABSU BOTLSH newly appointed Bireet aMSenerml of Xaformotion Saanriees is the Baited States and by Mr. Sherwood himself. In & telsgraa to tfe Missistcr &f Isfeematiaa is July 1942 Mr. Sutler urged that tbs British political warfare orgeniestioa in the United States should sot l di.sl a te4 by the appoiateent of b mm misalm but that the rapraeesjtati sIkwM tee Left in tha teds of Security C ard.inatio expaading this if accessary. Alawssd at lasing contact cite iia official with whoa be had estaMisfeed stuch close terns of cooperation.. Ift . Stemoed took ap the natter with his cmn chief Mr SLUM DAVIS and Mr. Davis oaWLed the Aawriewn Minister in Loaaaa asking hi to urge on tfe Minister of Iitfem&tlen that no ebengc shoull be dc in tb existing arrangements Those efforts torever appear to hare egme too 1st for sxreageaentw for tL.j eetafellstent of the see W mission wont ahead without interruptic . The dangers which B.S.C Minted oat might aoeompa y such dcvclopmant tev, -9    Iready b oaa f at. P-.F. now has direct liaison with the Sherwood orgaiiiocticm  that and nothin more. Control has h n lost The Sherwood orga-iisatioc atill has iia dally diffieulties as in the ease of Mr. Stanley hot it will solve tbaa to it own way The'oonplate reliance on Britain haw diaappeared and with it the complete control by Britain. Finally because of the long-tew isportaaec of ioliticai warfare it Is that opinion of the experts writing this report that as a result of the change in the handling of political warfare. Great Britain no- stands to grave danger of .losing tit psae or at ttoa very least of taring a decisive voice to peace councils. Iffiorieaa political TOrfare has becoffie a flood which is now   weeping tote the deatoions of the Uspire itself. kt tte tiias of writing there is by wmj ttoss mra Atssrican pr&gitgw&m to Canada Soath Africa Australia and Sew Zcalsm ths.n there is Sritiah propagmda. That sirrato direct tat so potentially dangerous seed of JhMe&MB propaganda is bein ' scattered over the ether and to pamphlets and poster sMttg the peoples of lurcps and the far last. To those except xperts it eey take ss e months before the growth of that seed beeoaee apjmreat but it will certelfily be firmly rested before the Allies sit round victsrio'as p .o table, S-O-B. H ToA  FILE NUMBER SUBJECT HISTORY 43 Notes on American VOLUME Organisations and Personnel  incomplete FROM 19 41 TO 1943,  J f INDEX.  1. British Offices in Washington. 5 copies on G.M. spare copies file. Chart of British Security Co-ordination.  3. Notes on the present S-0. organisation in the Western Hemisphere.  4. Notes on S.T.S. 1035. Notes on the Washington office of British Security Co-ordination.  5 copies on G.M. spare copies file. 6. American organisations in Washington with whom British Security Co-ordination works.  5 copies on G.M. spare copies file.  7. South American organisation since re-organisation February-March 1943. 8. South American organisation prior to re-organisation February-March 1943. 9 List of New fork S.O. Personnel Washington and Canada. 10. 11. Re-organisation of S.O. in Latin America. v 1 copy on G.M. spare copies file., , March 24th 1943  BRITISH OFFICES IN WASHINGTON  The British organizations in Washington fall under three main divisions  A. The Embassy consisting of  1 Chancery  2 War Trade Department  3 British Information Services  4 P.W.E. Mission  5 Treasury Representatives B. The Services consisting of  1 The Joint Staff Mission  2 British Army Staff  3 British Admiralty Delegation  4 R.A.F. Delegation C. Supplies consisting of  1 British Supply Council  2 British Supply Mission  5 Various Service Supply Missions. So far as A is concerned the Embassy works more or less independently of the other Missions in Washington and is concerned only as it would be in peacetime with political questions as between the British and American Governments. The War Trade Department represents the Ministry of Economic Warfare the British Information Services represent the Ministry of Information. They are headed.up by Mr. Noel Hall and Mr. Harold Butler respectively. The P.W.E. Mission is headed by Mr. David Bowes-Lyon and fairly close contact is main tained by B.S.C. with this Mission.  The Treasury representation is headed by Sir Frederick Phillips who though working under the aegis of the Embassy does not have his office there but works in the same building as the Supply Council.  The Service representation in Washington is headed by the Joint Staff Mission. This is headed by Sir John Dill and, the three heads of the main Service Missions -i.e. Lt. Gen. G.N. Macready Commander of the British Amy Staff Admiral Sir Percy Noble Commander of the British Admiralty Delegation and Air Marshal Sir Douglas Evill head of the R.A.F. Delegation.  These four officers represent the British Chiefs of  Staff in London on the Combined Chiefs of Staff Committee with  the Americans who consist of Admiral Leahy General Marshall  Admiral King and General Arnold.  The Secretariat of the Joint Staff Mission used to  be headed by Brigadier Dykes who was recently killed. It is  now to be headed by Brigadier Redman. He will be assisted as  was Brigadier Dykes by Commander Coleridge. They act in the  dual capacity of being the Mission Secretariat and Joint  Assistant Secretariat of Combined Chiefs of Staff and the  direct representatives of the Cabinet offices in Washington  together with being the centralizing Secretariat for the whole  J.S.M. The rest of the organization of the J.S.M. consists of the Joint Staff Planners the Joint Intelligence Committee the Combined Communications Board the representatives of the C.C.O. together with Missions from Canada and Australia.  The Joint Staff Planners consist of Brigadier McNair Captain Le Porteur and Air Commodore Strafford.  The Joint Intelligence Committee has two functions one to collect and report to London such intelligence of an operational nature as is collected by its various members in the course of their duty and the other to work on joint papers with the American J.I.C. and to interpret to them the views of the London J.I.C.  The Committee consists of representatives of the Embassy M.E.W. Amy Navy and Air Force and B.S.C. For the purpose of carrying out the second of its functions only the, Service members regularly attend and the other members are only  called in when the subject under discussion particularly concerns  them.  \  The regular members of the Committee are Colonel Bebb M.E.W. Chairman Lt. Col. Cooke Captain Hastings Group Captain Du Boulay assisted by Mr. John Russell of the Embassy Mr. Batt of M.E.W. and Squadron Leader Henry of B.S.C.  The Combined Communications Board comes little within the orbit of B.S.C. The British Delegation is headed by Captain Knatt Chief British Naval Signal Officer in Washington.  The C.C.O. s chief representative in Washington is Captain Knox with whom from time to time B.S.C. have matters of common interest and with whom they are in close liaison.  The relationship of B.S.C. generally with the Joint Staff Mission is a close one and is chiefly maintained through the Secretariat although from time to time individual officers both in the Planning and in the Intelligence staff are consulted.  So far as the rest of the British Service representation is concerned in Washington connection with B.S.C. 3 only spasmodic and on an ad hoc basis. In all cases however closest coopera tion has been found possible.  So far as Supplies is concerned the British organiza tions are now centralized under the Resident Minister Colonel Llewellyn who is Chairman of the British Supply Council on which are represented all the various missions interested in supply questions.  Attached to the Resident Minister is a new office called the British Civil Secretariat headed up by F.R.Hoyer-lillar who until recently was Counsellor at the Embassy. The functions of this office are to coordinate the work of the various British Civil Missions in Washington and to act as the Washington representatives of the Civil side of the Cabinet Secretariat in London. This office has only been in existence for a short time but is already showing, 4. its value in preventing overlapping and ensuring that things  get dealt with by the right offices.  The main supply agency is the British Supply Mission which works in close harmony with the British Raw Materials Mission. Much of the personnel of these two Missions is drawn from the Services and there appears to be as a result a certain amount of duplication. It is difficult however to give any sort of picture of the organization of the British Supply Mission without going into far too great detail. Suffice it to say that  B.S.C. has a number of dealings with the Supply Mission and in spite of a volume of red tape has succeeded generally speaking in securing what is required. While the above description of British offices in Washington is extremely general it gives some sort of picture of the present set-up although by its very brevity it cannot give any idea of its complicated nature. So far as B.S.C. is concerned the organization of the J.S.M. is by far the most important and is the one to which in addition to the Embassy we look to for help and advice., Section BRITISH SECURITY CO-ORDINATION AND CHART 2., BRITISH SECURITY CO-ORDINATION  British Security Co-ordination represents the following Departments and Organizations   1 S.I.S. 48 000  2 Security Executive  5 S.O.E.  4 M.I.5 Security Service  5 Passport Control see attached chart   SECURITY EXECUTIVE The Security Division of British Security Co-ordination is responsible for the following activities   1 U.S. and Canadian liaison with Services F.B.I. and Coastguards.  2 -K-Consular Security organization in U.S.A.,  3 Consular Security organization in Latin America.  4 Industrial Security organization in Latin America.  5 Reporting on Labor questions and Communism.  6 Dock fire inspection.  7 Credit investigation.  8 Personnel investigation for Allied Armed Forces.  9 Security of British Missions. K-Consular Security Officers are attached to Consulates at most ports in U.S.A. and South America.  THE DIVISION IS UNDER THE DIRECTION OF SIR CONNOP GUTHRIE HEADQUARTERS ARE AT EXCHANGE PLACE WALL STREET.   S.O.E.  see chart attached The Division is divided into seven sections viz 1 Latin America. G.0.1  2 Minorities. G.0.2  3 Intelligence and Planning. G.I.  4 Recruiting G.R.  5 Training G.T.  6 Administration and Supplies. G.A.  7 Liaison with O.S.S. G.M. U.Q. is at UT office in New York but an office is maintained in Washington UNDER THE DIRECTION OF MAJOR THE HON. B. PLEYDELL-BOUVERIE. a- SECURITY SERVICE REPRESENTATION M.I.5 This Division UNDER THE DIRECTION OF MAJOR H.M. HYDE  C.O.S.I. is responsible for co-ordinating of security measures and intelligence and the functions of M.I.5 Security Officers in the Caribbean with security requirements in this area for liaison with The Royal Canadian Mounted Police The Department of External Affairs Ottawa Canadian Postal and Telegraph Censorship in Ottawa and Canadian Military Intelligence Security authorities, Newfoundland and F.B.I.   N.B. B.S.C. is represented on the Western Hemisphere Security Committee which meets regularly in Washington New York and Ottawa in rotation.   PASSPORT CONTROL Passport Control is responsible for issue of visas and for check on suspicious travellers. It is under the direction of Captain I. McEwen Assistant Passport Control Officer who is responsible to 48 000 as Passport Control Officer. A Passport Office was recently opened at Miami  B.S.C. maintains close liaison with the United States Services in Washington and New York O.N.I. and G.2 War Department and as a member of the Joint Intelligence Committee in Washington is in touch with the Joint Chiefs-of-Staff and Joint Staff Mission. Contact is also maintained with the O.S.S. New York and Washington the Coast Guard Service F.C.C. and the Departments of State and Justice in Washington.  Through its Washington office liaison is established with the Embassy and British Missions. NOTE 2  The Communications Division of B.S.C. is under the direction of Professor B. DeF. Bay y. H.Q. is in New York., , Section NOTES ON THE PRESENT S.O. ORGANISATION IN 3. THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE, NOTES ON THE PRESENT S.O. ORGANISATION IN THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE.  INDEX.  Page  G.M. Section 1. Section G.O.l -Central and South America 1-2. Section G.0.2 -2-3. Recruiting 4. Washington 5. Canada 5.  S.T.S.103 6. Travel 6. Supplies 7.-7A. Finance and Administration 8. Officers on Loan 8-9. Communications 10. Office Accommodation 10.  Attached Notes on S.T.S.103, NOTES ON THE PRESENT S.O. ORGANISATION IN THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE.  G.M. SECTION. The head of the S.O. Mission in America is Colonel Louis Franck and Ms deputy is Major Benson. The principle wMch has always been adopted is that Colonel Franck and Major Benson work in the same room so that there is a complete interchange of ideas and information and in the event of either being away the other will be able to deal with all matters.  Colonel Franck is responsible to W.S. Stephenson who is in charge throughout the Western Hemisphere of not only S.O. but also S.I. and Security. The G.M. Secretariat was run by Mrs. Gabell but she is returning to England and her place is being taken by Miss Stagg.  SECTION G.0.1 CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA. TMs section is responsible for Intelligence Planning and  Operations in Central and South America. The head of the department is Ivar Bryce who has recently been on a tour of Central and South America  accompanied part of the time by Colonel Franck with the object of putting  our organisation there on to a greatly reduced basis.  Ivar Bryce was educated at Eton and until the war broke out did comparatively little hard f applied work. Having regard to these disad vantages he has done very well as the head of the Central and South American Section. He has a keen political sense and a shrewd mind. His knowledge of personalities and conditions in Central and South America is extensive and Ms views on problems arising in that Continent are always interesting and usually valuable.  Gilbert Highet is a University scholar Balliol who came to tMs country some years before the war and held a post at Colombia University. He has a first-class academic brain is careful methodical persevering with a Mgh critical faculty wMch he uses to great advantage in Ms work., Page 2  A statement of the present S.O. organisation in Central and South America is included in this file.  Ivar Bryce and Gilbert Highet are responsible for receiving reports from our agents in Central and South America assessing their value and where necessary passing on their contents to London in the form of Reports. Particulars about suspicious or doubtful characters are carded so that inform ation is readily available whenever it is possible to take action against persons or organisations inimical to the United Nations.  All S.O. Operations in Central and South America involving the use of explosives are forbidden under an agreement with the Foreign Office but a great deal of good is done by this section in harassing pro-Axis members of the community and in getting the local Government and local police authorities in those countries to take action against them.  This section is also responsible through one of its agents in the field -Major Phillips lately stationed at Santiago but now at Buenos Aires for high level political manouevres with the object of discomforting the Axis. Major Phillips played a not inconsiderable part in causing Chile to break off relations with the Axis.  %  SECTION G.0.2 MINORITIES AND EMIGRE GROUPS The whole of this section is tinder' Mr. A.J. Halpern. Prior to the war he bad a legal business in London of an international character. Halpern has studied politics throughout his life and has a vast and valuable hoard of intelligence concerning the politics of all countries in the European area. He is personally known to all the important and also to a great many less important individuals representing the Minority Governments not only in North America but elsewhere - e is discreet and produces a great quantity of information on Minority movements and aspirations which is sent to London in the form of reports. These reports are usually sent to S.I. as well., Page 3.  H M. Sichel is the second in command in the Minorities and he pays particular attention to the Scandinavian bloc. In ad dition Sichel has contacts with the officials in external affairs in the Canadian Government in Ottawa and he usually arranged liaison with those officials on all matters affecting S.O. In this connection he works in close touch with T.G. Drewbrook.  H. Brook is the third member in the Minorities Section. He is not physically strong and in his earlier days wrote a best seller. He is not fully employed and it is suggested his services could be dispensed with without in any way doing harm to the Minorities Section. The Embassy in Washington places great reliance on the information obtained by Halpern in the course of his discussions with officials of Minority Governments and Ronald Campbell and Donald Hall attach a good deal of importance to the information which Halpern is able to pass on to them during his weekly trips to Washington.  As the war develops H.M.G. may consider it necessary to develop their contacts with the Minority groups more strongly with a view to post-war settlements in which case this section may require expanding and in some cases strengthening. This is a matter which has been under the consideration of D.S.C. and Colonel Franck for some time past and the matter has also been referred to C.D. in London for his views, Page 4  RECRUITING. Recruiting in the Western Hemisphere has been under the control of Major R.F.Lethbridge. For a long time it was considered that it was illegal for a British organisation to recruit subjects in the United States with the result that Major Lethbridge s work has been restricted to Canada where he has been obtain ing Italian and Yugo-Slav recruits. In this task he has been successful. Moreover a large recruiting pro gramme was prepared about three months ago with the object of obtaining the recruits which London stated that it required. In March 1943 however London re quested us to go slow on this programme. Efforts have been made to obtain from London an explanation of the go slow order and a clear statement of its re quirements for Italian and Yugo-Slav recruits but with out success and consequently Major Lethbridge has been recalled so that his services can be used to better ad vantage for work in Cairo. Negotiations were opened not long ago with Colonel Buxton of O.S.S. to ascertain whether it would not be possible to get recruits from the United States. These negotiations disclosed that it was not necessarily illegal for us to recruit in the United States but in view of London's lack of decision as to what they require there is no object in attempting to obtain recruits in the United States at this stage. It is proposed to delegate to Mr. Sichel all work pertaining to recruiting which previously has been carried out by Major Lethbridge., Page 5.  WASHINGTON  Major B.P. Bouverie is in charge of the Washington Office at 1106 Connecticut Avenue and he is responsible not only for looking after S.O. affairs there but also for attending to S.I. matters and acting as D.S.C.'s personal representative in Washington. Up to the present time it has also been necessary to have one officer in whole time attendance at the O.S. Headquarters in Q building for the purposes of making day to day contact with the S.O. officials of O.S.S. In the past this has been done by Lt. Colonel Sweet-Escott but in the future these duties will be assumed by Major R. Leonard.  Major Bouverie has been in Washington for the past 2 years and it is safe to say there are few officers in that city who are so well-known and well-liked as he is. He has a great capacity for making friends quickly and it is difficult to over-estimate the value of this officer's work in Washington not only for S.O. but for Anglo-American relations as a whole.  Major Bouverie is preparing a separate memorandum of the pasition of the Liaison Mission in Washington and the other organisations there with whom we come in contact.  CANADA We are represented in Canada by T.G. Drew-Brook who is a partner in Wills Bickle 8c Company of Toronto a firm of stockbrokers. Brew-Brook is not a strong personality nor has he a parti cularly clear mind. On the other hand he is most hardworking and is respected and liked not only in Toronto but in Ottawa and Montreal. He knows practically everybody in those three tovms and has a ready access to them. He is invaluable to us for keeping in touch with Canadian affairs and arranging matters for us with Canadian officials., Page 6.  S.T.S. 103- The School in Canada is situated at Oshawa which is some thirty miles outside Toronto. Major Benson recently spent a few days there and there is attached to this memorandum some notes which he made at the time of his visit. The chief point requiring decision is that referred to in paragraph 15 in which it is suggested that the whole policy and administration of S.T.S.103 should be placed under the New York Office as opposed to the present loose arrangement whereby nobody is quite sure what the position is and S.T.S.103 is partly responsible to New York and partly responsible to London.  TRAVEL  All arrangements for travelling are in the hands of Mrs. Ordway who does this work not only for S.O. but for S.I. and Security. She is experienced in travel conditions and is not unsuccessful in obtaining priorities. On the other hand she is a difficult personality as she is extremely noisy and distracts the attention of other members of the staff., Page 7 .  SUPPLIES S.O. in London obtain certain supplies from this country which fall into two distinct categories. The first category is wireless equipment which is purchased from suppliers here and the second is Toys and Devices. Toys and Devices are being manufactured for us by O.S.S. who manufac ture not only for us but also for themselves. Up to recent ly supply matters as affecting S.O. were supervised by Major Benson who had as his assistant Mr. A.E.Grubb. On the other hand. Professor Bayly has been responsible for some time past for purchasing large quantities of wireless equipment on behalf of S.I. and H.M.C.C. and on Lubbock s arrival in the UJQC3   0 -i cc goo   States in March 1943 it was arranged to put into effect a i UJ   'U as Li-' q. cr o reorganization planned some months ago whereby all supply O fc-Wo  y a-j     matters would be dealt with by Professor Bayly. Professor OUJUJ   CO   Bayly s staff now therefore consists of himself  F  Mr. Grubb and Mr. Davidson. This Supply Section will there Igog fore make all purchases required in this country and Professor r \    9 0   Bayly will be responsible for making liaison with the officers qf O.S.S. as regards the manufacture of Toys and Devices.  It will also be necessary to have in this work a higfyfcalibre technical official from S.O.E. London who will be able to advise on and supervise the manufacture of toys and devices for S.O.E. This has been agreed upon in principle by Lubbock and the post is at present being filled by D.D.S.R. but as London will probably be unable to release him per manently his place will have to be taken by some other officer nominated by Colonel Davies.  The Supply question as a whole has been in an unsatisfactory state for some time past. New York has felt that the organization in London has left much to be desired. This feeling has been represented to Lubbock very strongly, Page 7A.  since his arrival and it is hoped there will be an improve  ment in this direction in future. In addition the manufac  ture of Toys and Devices by O.S.S. has been held up for  several months as the necessary authority to proceed could  not be obtained from the U.S.Joint Chiefs of Staff. It is  understood that this authority has now been granted and the  manufacture of Toys and Devices will proceed immediately.  Another important point affecting the Supply question is that New York have been pressing London for some time to place their requirements on a long term basis and to submit their orders now for goods which will not be required for some months ahead. The reason for this is that several months must  necessarily lapse between the time the order is placed here and the time that the goods finally reach their destination. A request by New York that this policy should be followed met with no response from London but since Lubbock's arrival in this country it appears that the seriousness of the situation was appreciated and it is hoped that in the future London will conform to New York's recommendations., Page 8  FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION  The finances and the administration of the 3.0. office have been under the direct control of Major oenson since Ills arrival in this country. Shortly after his arrival Major Benson employed Mr. H.E. Busfield in substitution for the then accountant Mr. Duckworth who has since left. Major Benson has taken steps to pass the supervision of the accounts and administrative matters to Busfield with the result that M ajor Benson is now doing nothing more than keeping a watching brief over these matters. On Major Benson's departure all financial and administrative matters affecting the S.O. office will be taken over by Busfield who already attends  to these matters for the 3.1. office and for Security.  Busfield is a Lancashire man who is a qualified chartered accountant and he has had a good training in the foreirj branches of a well-known firm of chartered accountants in London. He has shown himself capable of supervising the accounts and dealing with administrative matters and he has installed in the S.I. office all the principles laid down by Major Henson for the control and management of the 3.0. office so that virtually speaking the whole organisation is on the same basis.  All members of the Accounts staff are on the S.I. payroll and the 3.0. is charged out a certain proportion of the total expend tiore each month.  OFFICERS ON LOAN Certain officers are on the payroll of S.O. who do not actually work for S.O. They are -   S. Morell. D.C. Brown. Captain Mostyn Davies. K. Wilson., Page 9.  D.G. Brown and S. Fforell were formerly employed in the S.O. office on the Propaganda Section but that Section has now been disbanded and these two officers are seconded whole time to O.W.I. S. Morrell is in the opinion of the writer an unsatisfactory character as certain unfortunate incidents have arisen concerning expense vouchers submitted by him. His attachment to O.W.I. is resented by our own P.W.E. Mission here and some of the O.W.I. officials themselves do not like his attachment to their organisation. It is intended in due course to dis pense with his services. D.C. Brown is an honest man but stupid and it is suggested that his services should also be dispensed with. Captain Mostyn Davies was previously with Colonel Franck in West AJrica and prior to that he was private secretary to Colonel Llewellyn at the Ministry of Aircraft Production. He is keen efficient and a likeable personality. He has been responsible for supervising the South American Security Scheme since its inception and has made an outstanding success of this operation. The South American Security Scheme started under the auspices of S.O. but some months ago was put under the direct responsi bility of Sir Connop Guthrie of Security. Sir Connop has agreed to release Captain Mostyn Davies in a few weeks time when it is probable that he will return to London to assist Colonel Franck in his new assignment there. Ken Wilson was also employed by S.O. on their Propaganda Section but he acted as second in command to Captain Davies when the South American scheme started. He is keen hardworking and conscientious but he requires a certain amount of supervision. Sir Connop has agreed to release him in a few weeks time but his ultimate future is not known. It is probable that he will be taken over by S.O. for a short time until suitable employment  can be found for him., Page 10.  COMMUNICATIONS  Communications in this hemisphere are under Professor Bayly who has been responsible for building them up from the beginning and he has made an outstanding success of this work. New York office is in direct TK communication with Washington S.T.S.103 and Ottawa. There is a closed line between S.T.S.103 and Toronto and messages for Drew-Brook are passed on to him immediately from S.T.S.103.  In addition Professor Bayly supervises work on interceptor traffic. A short tour of inspection of the cable offices on  the 35th floor is the best means of appreciating the extent of the system of communications which could scarcely be im proved.  At S.T.S.103 in Canada there is a radio transmitting and receiving station referred to as Hydra through which all cables to and from London are received and sent. The Commer  cial Cables are only used in the event of a breakdown of Hydra. Commercial Cables are used for the purpose of communi cating with Central and South America.  OFFICE ACCOMODATION  Owing to the considerable reduction of the S.O. organisation the office accommodation in New York is excessive and in conjunction with S.I. steps should be taken to consider whether a reduction could not be effected. An alternative would be to move the whole S.O. office to Washington as in the future the main function of the S.O. organisation is likely to be highlevel liaison work with O.S.S. in Washington., Section NOTES ON S.T.S. 103. 4., NOTES BI GM. 175 on STS.105   As result of visit on 8th & 9th March 1945 .  COTTAGE FOR USE OF PARA-MILITARY STUDENTS.  1. The cottage on the other side of the road on ground which is not owned by us has been put in good order and is now being used to house the Yugo-slavs who are in training. The cottage has been put in good order entirely by the use of the existing staff of STS.105 and has been done at very little cost. As soon as the warmer months come the students will be put under canvas and the cottage will be used only in the case of severe weather conditions. In the event of London deciding that a big programme of Yugoslav recruiting is to take place it will be necessary to enlarge the water and ablution facilities at a cost of about 3000. This sum will be spent on erect ing a well on the lakeside and putting up an adequate ablution shed on our own property. LEASE OF COTTAGE. 2. As stated above this cottage is not on our own property and there is a risk that the lease may be determined. At present it is on a monthly basis of 25. a month. The owner of the cottage is however a lunatic and it is therefore better not to press him for a long lease but to let the present arrangement continue. HYDRA BUILDING. 3. The building to house the Hydra personnel is nearing completion. I have no technical knowledge but it seemed to me that the building was well constructed. It is larger than is required to house the 28 men involved in Hydra operations and if STS.105 expands it may be necessary or desirable to use part of the Hydra building to take up the overflow. MILITARISATION OF HYDRA PERSONNEL. 4. The Hydra employees are all civilians, -2   tive difficulties as they have privileges which are denied to the military personnel on the establishment of STS.103. The Commandant is anxious to put the Hydra personnel into uniform and I agree with this proposal. It has also been agreed in principle by G.142. The whole future of Hydra is however at present under discussion and until a decision is made no steps will be taken to militarise the Hydra Personnel. BUILDINGS GENERALLY AT STS.105. .5. Much has been said and written about the buildings erected at STS.105. The writer does not speak with any technical know ledge but it appears that the buildings are adequate for the purpose and that they stand up to the severe weather conditions satisfactorily. STORAGE FACILITIES FOR TOYS AND DEVICES.  6. In 1942 huts were erected for housing toys and devices and there is accommodation to store reserve stocks of toys and devices if required. HEATING OF BUILDINGS. 7. The heating of the buildings at STS.103 is a problem which must be settled during this summer. The erection of the new Hydra building has thrown far too great a strain on the existing boiler with the result that it will be necessary to install a second boiler as soon as the mild weather arrives. The second boiler will be used for supplying hot water throughout the camp and the existing boiler will be used for providing the heating. At the present time if anything happened to the existing boiler all work could come to a standstill. It is hoped that no breakdown will take place before the warm weather. Arrangements to install the second boiler are already in hand between the Comman dant and G.9000, -2-  CPURSES IN PROGRESS.  8. At the time of the writer's visit two courses were running consisting of a course for Yugoslav recruits totalling sixteen in number and a course of O.W.I. students ten in number who were at the camp for instruction for one week. It is the writer's view that if students are to attend the camp it is preferable that they should go there for not less than a fortnight. The time trouble and organisation required to send men up there for a week's course does not appear justified. RELATIONS WITH LOCAL AUTHORITIES. 9. The relations between S.T.S.103 and the local military authorities and the R.C. .P. appear to be excellent. The camp appears to be able to obtain within limits anything it requires in the way of men material and facilities from these sources. INSTRUCTING STAFF. 10. After Colonel Brooker has return to England the instructing staff will be as follows  Lt. Colonel C.S. Skilbeck -Commandant. Major P. Dehn. Captain F. Milner. Captain Pelbam-Burn. Lieutenant R.H. Hannay. Second Lieutenant Walsh.  The Adjutant of the School who does no instructing is Captain Bushell.  London have been asked to approve the return to England of Captain Milner.  11. Until recently the instructing staff at S.T.S.193 has scarcely been 0.dequate to deal with the volume of students passing through the School. However on the arrival of Bajor Dehn and Captain Pelham-Burn in a few days time the instructing staff will be larger in number than it has ever been before and unless a comprehensive recruiting and training programme for Yugoslavs is introduced the instructing staff will be excessive. C0MI.1ANDANT. 12. Major Skilbeck will become Commandant when Colonel Brooker leaves. question whether he has the breadth of vision and the poise necessary to carry out this task with anything like the same success as his predecessor. His efforts in the ensuing months will require to be carefully watched., -4-   FUTURE COURSES.  13. The future of the school will shortly have of London's instructions as to its training policy for the future which are now awaited. The following are the sources through which S.T.S.103 may be expected to obtain students  a South American Security Scheme. There are about thirty students still to be trained.  b O.W.I. There are fifty students still to be trained in accordance with oxir undertaking to O.W.I.  c S.O. and S.I. Operations and Personnel. The nuraber of students available under this heading is thought to be small under existing circumstances.  d Italians. London has asked for Italian recruits and recruiting is now in progress.  e Yugoslavs. A decision is awaiting from London as to whether recruiting is to continue.  f F.B.I. There has been a suggestion that we sho\ild train a few F.B.I. men who are going to specialise in the American part of the South American Security Scheme. STATE OF S.T.S.103 AS A WHOLE.  14. The spirit of S.T.S.103 is good and the discipline is high. The Camp is well kept and it compares favourably with training establishments of a similar character in England particularly in vie1. of the difficulties with which the Commandant is faced in having Canadians under his command who are not trained in the same way as English troops. CONTROL OF S.T.S.103. 15. Ths higher control of the school is confused. For financial purposes it is under the control of New York and it is also under the direction of New York as regards certain administrative fundtions. On the other hand as regards training and policy it is responsible directly to DCD O in England. The officers at S.T.S.103 have a tendency to regard themselves as a separate Training Mission sent out from England responsible only to DCD O and that they may train whomsoever they please. They regard co-operation with New York rather as a matter of courtesy than as an obligation. Up to the present no difficulties have arisen but the principle of having a school in Canada operating under a loose arrangement which mqkes it partly responsible to London and partly to New York is unsatisfactory. The solution would appear to be to make it responsible to New ork for all purposes and New York would then be responsible to London., Section NOTES ON THE WASHINGTON OFFICE OF BRITISH 5. SECURITY CO-ORDINATION, 23rd. March 1943.  NOTES ON THE WASHINGTON OFFICE OF BRITISH SECURITY CO-ORDINATION., AMERICAN ORGANISATIONS IN WASHINGTON WITH WHOM BRITISH SECURITY CO-ORDINATION WORKS., THIS IS A COPY ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS 24th March 1945. ACT 1958 AMERICAN ORGANIZATIONS IN WASHINGTON WITH WHOM BRITISH SECURITY COORDINATION WORKS  1. G-40.000 A. HISTORY G-40 000 was formed by Presidential Directive in July 1941 for the purpose of coordinating information for the use of the Executive Office of the President. G-50 000 was per sonally responsible to G-60 000 and was in continuous personal  touch with him. The early development of G-40 000 was mainly in the fields of propaganda which was organized under G-50 100  S  and of the Research and Analysis Branch which started under  Dr. James Baxter subsequently replaced by Dr. W.L.Danger .  In October 1941 G-50 200 was selected as the future Head .of G-40 000's S.O. Branch and he went over to London to study S.O.E's methods in detail. On his return in January 1942 he took active control of the newly-formed S.O. Section.  In the meanwhile the S.I. Section had been put in charge of G-50 217 and thanks to a great deal of assistance which he received from rapidly set to building up a very workmanlike organization.  In the meanwhile G-50 200 was making little progress in his attempts to set up an organization and at his own suggestion was transferred as Assistant WM in Lisbon. He subsequently severed all connection with G-50 000 and returned to G.2. His place was taken by G-50 201 who remained in active charge until July 1942.  Lhiring this period a great deal of work was done in setting up training schools and in recruiting. Unfortunately, however the conception of what S.O. work should be held by G-50 201 and his officers was very different from what in fact it is and the bulk of the work done during this period was of a para-military nature and it was entirely wasted.  In June 1942 G-50 201 accompanied G-50 000 to London and the first discussions regarding the inter-working of G-40 000 and S.O.E. took place. A provisional agreement was reached in these discussions and it has formed the basis of our joint workings ever since.  Early in August 1942 G-50 214 took over from G-50 201 the executive Headship of G-40 000 s S.O.Branch G-50 201 being put in charge of the guerilla units which were then going to be formed.  Previous to this on June 15th 1942 a new Executive Order was signed t y G-60 000 splitting off G-50 100's Section from G-40 000 and making G-40 000 a supporting agency of the COS and no longer part of the Executive Office. This Executive Order was the result of many months of discussion and negotiation and was a turning point in the development of G-40 000. Simul taneously an Executive Order was signed creating O.W.I. Elmer  Davis and Robert Sherwood .  The progress of the S.O. Branch under G-50 214 between August and December 1942 was slow largely owing to admini strative difficulties which G-40 000 was having regarding the  allocation of Service personnel. G-50 214 visited London in September 1942 and discussed in further detail the agreement arrived at at the previous meetings with G-50 201. Towards the end of December 1942 G-50 214 again left Washington to visit North Africa the Middle East and London., -5 -  B. FUNCTIONS The present functions of G-40 000 are governed by a COS Directive that was issued on the 22nd. of December 1942. This Directive laid down that G-40 000 should be responsible for the military programme of Psychological Warfare. In order to perform this function the following tasks were specifically allotted  il. Sabotage  2. Espionage in enemy-occupied or enemycontrolled territory S. Organization and conduct of guerilla warfare 4. Counter-espionage in enemy-occupied or enemy-controlled territory 5. Contact with underground groups in enemyoccupied or enemy-controlled territory 6. Contact with foreign national groups in the U.S. to do the collection of essential information for the execution of Psychological Warfare operations in consultation with WP. Items 1 5 and 5 are straight S.O. functions and these tasks have been allotted to the S.O. Branch of G-40 000.  Items 2 and 4 are handled by the S. I. Section of G-40 000 and item 6 is handled by the Foreign Nationalities Branch which works in very close liaison with our New York Office.  The functioris of the Research and Analysis Branch of G-40 000 were also confirmed in the new Directive. Unless specifically instructed to the contrary they were restricted to matters of a political economic and sociological nature. In this new Directive the Planning Group was set up with representa tives of the Army the Navy and the State Department as well as G-40 000 for the purpose of making over all plans for the mili tary programme of Psychological Warfare. This group is in active operation but it is not yet possible to say to what extent it has yet produced any worthwhile results. It is headed up by Dr. James Rodgers who was Under-Secretary of State in the last Republican Administration and the whole group consists of men  of considerable ability.,  4-   Subsequent to the signing of this directive a dispute arose as to the scope of G-40 000 and OWI G-50 000 maintaining that so far as foreign propaganda is concerned his office should be the policy-making unit leaving the open side of propaganda to be dealt with by O.W.I. and the under-cover side by G-40 000. This dispute was finally concluded by a new Executive Order signed by G-60 000 on March 9th 1943  defining the foreign propaganda activities of 0. W. I. and handing to O.W.I. the direction of all such activities. It is still the contention of G-50 000 that under-cover propaganda is part of his functions although this has not been as yet completely estab lished.  2. THE F. B. I. A. HISTORY The F.B.I. which was founded some 25 years ago was the first Federal investigative agency ever set up in the U.S. Their original function was purely law-enforcement within the territory of the U.S. and they had no foreign sphere.  Since September 1959 they have however been entrusted with the collection of general intelligence and counter-espionage intelligence in the whole of the Western Hemisphere.  While there have been a number of disputes as between them and WM and WN regarding the scope of each agency their functions can now be summarized as being responsible for the security excluding Naval and Military security for all U.S. interests in the Western Hemisphere.  B. S.Cls relations with the F.B.They have been restricted to work of an S.I. nature and while they are aware of the existence of S.O.E. there has been no occasion for liaison with them. The only point of contact has, -5   been the training of a certain number of their personnel at STS-10S. While it is not known to what extent they benefited by this instruction from a practical point of view there is little doubt that the offer of STS-103's facilities has done much to help B.S.C.'s general relations with the F. B. I.  3. THE U. S. SERVICES Liaison is maintained with WM and IN first and foremost for the purpose of exchanging military or naval intelligence emanating from Latin America. In addition there is close con tact between the Radio Intelligence Sections of the Services and B. S. C. which relationship has grown and increased considerably over the last few months.  So far as S.O.E. is concerned there is no direct contact with the U. S. Services except through the British Joint Staff Mission although the U.S. COS are of course fully aware of the  existence of SOE and of its liaison office in Washington.  4. OTHER U. S. OFFICES Contact is maintained with a number of other U.S. offices such as the Department of Justice Office of Censorship War Production Board B. E. W. but all these connections are main tained for the purpose of S.I.S. liaison and do not need to concern S.O.E. in any way., , , , THE NEW YORK TIMES SUNDAY OCTOBER 26 1941.  EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT M IS PERMANENT JOINT BOARD ON DEFENSE UNITED STATES AND\ CANADA  COORDINATOR OF INFORMATION  VISION OF CENTRAL ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES I9 SUPPLy PRIORITIES AND ALLOCATIONS BOARD OFFICE Of OVIUAN DEFENSE DIVISION OP CONTRACT DISTRIBUTION  DIVISION OF DEFENSE HOUSING COORDINATION  1K DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVV  U. S. Mann Corpt DEPT. OF AGRICULTURE OTTie of Agricultural Dcfent Relations  DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURT U. S. Coast Guard  IIl ' OFFICE OF THE COORDINATOR OF INTER-AMERICAN AFFAIRS OFFICE FOR SOENTIFlC RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT  OFFICE OF PRICE ADMINISTRATION   1 PRICE OPERATIONS CONSUMER SERVICES KEY TO THE FEDERAL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION, WASHINGTON Oct. 2SThe latwt ov rall d eu09 chart publUhad h ra shows that under the President thirty-for separate agencies divisions or offices are concerned with one or more defense problems and an unofficial enumeration shows that a total of more than 800 000 employes are at work in these offices either in Washington or in the field. The bulk of this personnel however is engaged in the War and Navy Departments which together have a total of 575.000 civilian employes and they have large forces even in time of peace. Another 220.000 employes are administering the Selective Service Act passing on registrants for conscription into the Army and 200 000 of these are unpaid workers in local com munities. At the top of the defense effort is of curse the President of the United States  ho hi ' is Commander m Chiaf of ths Army and the Navy. In the seventeen months since the defense program began he has delegated increasing powers to vari ous individuals and organizations but has retained for himself the final veto. It is the President s contention that under the Con stitution he cannot delegate the final re sponsibility of the Executive. In the special agencies created to meet the problems of defense key positions are held by the Supply Priorities and Alloca tions Board 19 the Office of Production Management 24 and the Office of Price Administration 32 . As they appear on the chart the defense organizations below the President are U Petroleum Coordinator for National Defense. Secretary of Interior Ickes. A staff of 220 is engaged in formulating with government agencies and the oil com panies. methods of conserving petroleum for national defense and of increasing supply. This organization recommended and OPM s Priorities Division ordered the 10 per cent reduction in gasoline deliveries 1 on ihe Eastern seaboard which was re voked last week after Secretary Ickes an nounced that rail deliveries plus the return of some United States tankers loaned to Britain had improved inventories in the area.  2 Selective Service System. Brig Gen. Lewis B. Hershey director. Staff of 220 000 of which approximately 20 000 are paid employes. It is in charge of drafting men fsom 21 to 27 inclusive who are physically and mentally fit for service in the Army.  3 War Department. Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson. A staff of 316 936 ci vilian employes. Its job of course is to or ganize and equip the Army which has grown to approximately 1 600 000 men.  1 r'Mmeii National Defense. This organization dating Dack to pre-World War days is composed of the Secretaries of War Navy Interior Agriculture Com merce and Labor but is inactive in the Tesent emergency  5 Economic Defense Board. Vice resident Wallace chairman. A staff of 800 v.arklng under the direction of Milo Perkins coord rates the work of other gov ernment agencies engaging in economic warfare on four frents dealing with export controls imports procurement the financial controls represented by freezing foreign funds and publishing proclaimed lists of persons with whom business exchanges are forbidden to Americans. A main ob jective is to stop Axis economic penetration in Latin America.  6 Coordinator of Information. Wil liam J. Donovan coordinator. This agency which is in charge of United States coun ter-propaganda in Axis territory is ex tremely uncommunicative to the American public about its work. Its officials declined to state how many employes It has but it is known that the number has been growing.  1 Permanent Joint Board on Defense United States and Canada. Co-chairmen Mayor La Guardia of New York for th American section and O. M Bigger LL C. for the Canadian section. It io ctorgwS with coordinating North American defense.  8 Deportment of Nsvy. Secretary Frank Knox. A Washington and field staff of 260.000 civilians. Its job Is to build and arm the two-ocean Navy and in the pres ent emergency patrol the waters of the At lantic. .  9 U. S. Coast Guard. Rear Admiral Russell R. Waesche commandant It has a civilian staff of 5 000 and is aiding the Navy in patrolling the Atlantic patrolling harbors Inspecting foreign ships requisi tioning foreign vessels on order of the 8e retary of the Treasury operating the tn\ tefHh'lonal ice patrol and providing light' house I'rvice valuable both to ehipe and The vrar that cams to Kuropo twmty-aia months ago haa eaused the Unitad States to create ha greatest peacetime organization for defense. The chart above an official diagram of this organiza tion illustrates the relationship of agencies and divisions one to another. The key numbers do not indicate relative importance of divisions. Below is an outline of the part of each in defense. transatlantic bomber flights. It was a Coast Guard vessel under naval direction which seized the Nazi radio station in Greenland.  10 Office of Agricultural Defense Relaiivm. M. Clifford Townsend director. A staff of twenty working with regular De partment ut AgilCultu. c empiujea vises the purchase of large quantities of food for the British since the United States now is not only the arsenal but also the larder of the democracies.  11 Office for Emergency Management. Wayne Coy liaison officer. With a head quarters staff of twenty-three it is the clearing house from the President to twelve other defense agencies.  12 Division of Information headed by Robert W. Horton with a staff of 220 employes which provides information offi cers for each of OEM s branches both in Washington and in the field and is the main point of contact between newspaper men and defense activities.  13 Division of Central Administrative Services with 669 employes which main tains a central budgeting accounting and fiscal control system for the OEM and its constituent agencies. It also makes pro vision for OEM personnel and office space.  14 Division of Defease Aid Reports. Edward R. Stettinius Jr. administrator. A staff of 207 employes coordinates the processipg of requests or aid under the Lease- Lend Act and keeps the President advised of lease-lend progress.  15 Division of Transportation. Ralph Budd director. A staff of twenty is charged with coordinating United States transporta tion facilities to meet all defense needs.  16 Defense Communications Board. James Lawrence Fly chairman. It is charged with developing a coordinated pro gram for the operation of all forms of com munication especially radio in event of United States involvement-iu war.  17 Office of Defense Health and Wel fare Services. Paul V. McNutt director. A staff of 125 constitutes a central coordinat ing agency for health and welfare servicu to met thf aMds of localities arising from the defense progratn.  18 National Defense Mediation Board. W. H. Davis chairman. A board repre sentative of the public employers and em ployes with a staff of sixty-seven. It is charged with the task of preventing or settling labor disputes in defense industries.  19 Supply Priorities and Allocation Board. Vice PresWent Wallace chairman. It is charged with final responsibility in questions of priorities and supplies of ma terials.  20 Office of Civilian Defense. Mayor F. H. La Guardia director. A staff of 228 is charged with planning and carrying out civilian defense programs for the protec tion of life and property in the event of emergency including the recruitment and training of civilian auxiliaries. It Is con cerned also with national morale.  21 Division of Defense Housing Co ordination. C. F. Palmer coordinator. A staff of 214 has the responsibility of ascer taining the amount and character of hous ing that must be supplied for military and civilian personnel engaged in defense activ ities and to eaeuro that the lack of ade quate fewanasing does not impede th national effort. This dirteios basiMe rao bouses M a g but cooniinatei ttofc of the otlssr tensing agencies and passes on their priorities request for OPM.  22 Office for Scjenttfte iivaotwcfe md roarratoffsrasat. Vannovar Bush director. A staff of 5M of whom only 100 are full time paid employes is coordinating and supplementing existing government re search work on defense project mobilising  the seientiat of private industry for de fense work and advising the President on scientific problems.  28 American Affairs. Nelson A. Rockefeller coordinator. With a staff of 326 thi or ganization la attempting to improve Iturai and conssaefeial relation among tho ought to Increase United StatdrAmpona from Latin America to stop Axis economic penetration in the South American coun tries and to help Latln-American countries buy necessary products here.   24 Office of Production Management. William S. Knudsen director general and Sidney Hillman associate director general  With a total staff of approximately 3 900 in seven main divisions and miscellaneous bureaus this organization is the central agency for the production of planes tanka ships and other weapons of war although it has no procurement powers and serv.-a the Army and Navy purely in an advisory capacity. Its powers reach out through every sphere of American economic life.  25 Division of Production. W H Harrison director. This division with a ' staff of 378 coordinates and assiata the effort of tge Army the Navy and the Maritime Commission in mobilizing exist ing production facilities providing emer gency plants facilities and expediting in general the production of aircraft ord nance ships and too'. Division nf Pu wins Douglas C. McKeachie director. With a staff or 179 most of then purchasing agents in pri vate business the division must review prior to award all proposed contracts of more than 500 000 for the purchase of materials articles or equipment needed by the Army and Navy. It assists also in the placement of original orders for Army supplies.  27 Priorities Division. Donald M Nelson director. Its job is to put first things first through the allocation of scarce materials and the issuance of preference ratings which puts four-engined bombers for example ahead of kitchenware in the demand for aluminum. A staff of 505 ad ministers the system.  28 Labor Division. Sidney Hillman director. It has a staff of 784 and is con cerned with the problems of labor supply labor training labor relations labor morale and labor standards throughout the defense program.  29 Division of Civilian Supply. Leon Henderson director. This agency with a  staff of 224 is charged with the responsi bility of allocating scarce materials among competing civilian demands. It has ordered a 51 per cent cut in automobile production in January for example to insure that the armed services get all the steel they need and that more essential civilian demands have a better chance of obtaining necessary steel.  30 Division of Materials. W. L. Batt director. A staff of 393 is responsible for planning and carrying out an integrated program for the supply of raw and semi finished materials needed for defense pro duction. Under its supervision the plan for expanding steel production by 10 000.000 tons was drawn up and sent to the OPM Council and to SPAB for final approval  SI Division of Contract Distribution. Ftoyd B. Odium director. This new agency wlrioii haa a-staff of 600 now but is ex pected to grow rapidly In the comingmonths has the difficult task of spreading the defense work into more and more fac tories in order to speed up arms output and prevent the extinction of small business. It seeks to obtain the greatest utilization of industrial and labor facilities for defense purpose to convert into defense produc tion civilian industries which have been hampered by shortages of raw materials and to create pools of plant equipment from many small firms so that together they may undertake defense work which they could not handle individually.  32 Office of Price Administration. Leon Henderson administrator. With a staff of 983 this agency is charged with preventing inflation through control of prices. It operates at present without statu tory authority but an Administration-spon sored bill giving direct price-fixing au thority now is pending in Congress.  SS Division of Price Operations. J. K. Galbraith director. It job is to propoM8rice orders and administer them after  ey have been promulgated by Leon Bessderson. Price Administrator. In brief its teak ia to prevent inflation bp stopping or  t least rsetraintog price advances.  4 liMvWoi of Consume -Service. Harriet Klliot director. This division charged with maintaining the civilian si undard of living as high aa posaibie oonsiatent with military defense requiromenta worka with other government agencies In presenting the consumers' needs and viewpoint on problems of and supply maintains a field staff to aid miners In interpreting the defense pro gram and haa a Standards and Needs Sec tion. whose purpose Is to ooneerv essen  O  tial resources of matertali maehizne and man power entering into th product on of consumers' goods by studying the psobtema of substitution and slmpllficatlea., Section SOUTH AMERICAN ORGANISATION 8.  PRIOR TO RE-ORGANISATION FEBRUARY/MARCH 1943, SOUTH AMERICAN ORGANISATION AND SYMBOLS PRIOR TO REORGANISATION IN FEBRUARY/MARCH 1943  COUNTRY. SYMBOL.  Sub Agents.  G.1020  G.1030 G.10 100 G.10 101  A.G.10 101  B.G.10 101 C.G.10 101 D. E. F. G.10 102 G.10 103 G.10 200 G.10 201 G.10 300 G.10 400  COLOMBIA Head Agent.  G.5500  Sub Agents.  G.5501 G.5502 'G.5503' G.5504 TJ.5506 G.5507 G.5508 G.5509  G.5510 G.55H G.5512 G.5513 G.5514 G.5515 G.5516 G.5517 G.5518  G.5519 G.5520 G.5521 G.5522  G.5523 G.5524 G.5525  G.5526 G.5527 G.5529 G.5530  G.5531  G.5532 G.5533 G.5534  G.5535 G.5536 G.5537 G.5528  SALARY. BUDGET. MEMORANDA.   NAME.  No head  agent.  No a/c.   J. M.Mitchell - K. A.Acheson McGough Flodor Valbe - Palacios Abramy Ehrlichmann MichelG. 10 101 ResedoG.10 101  G.10 101   Luis Castillo - Norman George - Frank Finlay -   Claude Lee Watson Dodds -   Diaz Verson -   Clarence Kimmel '  Donovan Davis 300.00 2000.00 Sterling from London.  Dr. Vallejo Sanchez -   George Beese  A.E.B.Laurence  Barry Bateman -   Dept of Investigation Cali.  Joseph Reginald Harris  C. Godwin - Jorge Fety Restrepo J.D.Robertson S.K.Richards Julie Cesar Castillo T. B.Wildman ffll. A. Tor iff -   Donald McKellar -   Harry Bentley  Charles Lopez Isaacs. -   Alexander S. Hamilton -  Alexander Kippen  Charles M. Davidson -   Aurelio A. Woodcock -   George H. White  H.B.Greenwood  L.Tinkler  Walter Seel -   Eldon J. Lagonterie  Uribe -175 Col.pesos  Richard Allen  Juan Mendez -   Leonard England  Walter Bridge  Norman Edwards  National Police Invest.  Dept. Medellin  Leta Brooks . 150.00 U.S.  Helen Shaw - 150.00 U.S.  National Police Invest.Dept. Barranquilla  175 Col., -2 -   V'  COUNTRY NUMBER name salary budget memoranda    -'  Colombia G.5538 Beatrice J. Crossley   cont'd G.5539 John Chas. Crossley  G.5540 Carlos Fernandez Shaw   G.5541 William Ernest Aitken -Bogota  G.5542 George E. Robertson - 100.00  G.5543 John Hopkins -  G.5544 Board of Economic Warfare  G.5545 F.B.I. American Embassy  G.5546 M.E.W. British Legation  G.5547 H.S.M.Burns  G.5548 H.R.Thompson  G.5549 Arturo Vallejo Sanchez --900 Col.Pesos  G.5550 Luis Hernandez Ruiz  G.5551 E.F .Wise  G.5552 Press Dept.Br.Legation  G.5553 Lionel Vass   G.5554 John Barker -   G.5555 Joel Riley  G.5556 Alen Nicoll McIntosh  G.5557 A.J.Montague  VENEZUELA Head Agent  G.3000 Norman Longe 250.00 Paid in U.S.Dollars. 4 50 of Confidential Secretary shared with S.I.-50 Bs.350  Sub Agents  G.3 100 Juan de Olazabal - Domingo de Letamendi  G.3 101 G.3 102 Ravil Ucar - Angel Aznar  G.3 103 G.3 104 Jose Miguel Saizarvitorin G.3 105 Hilario Burgana Guipuzcoa G.3 106 Leandro Rique G. 3 107 G.3 108 G.3 109 G.3 200 Oscar Modrak G.3 201 Jan Provenec G. 3 202 Vaclav Hurt G 3 203 A. Arteaga G.3 204 Guillermo Llano G. 3 205 A. Weil G. 3 206 Ing. Goldberg G. 3 207 Esteban Rasdik G.3 208 Francisco Hlusicka G.3 209 Pierre Perez Cabral G.3 300 Estavan Koves G. 3 400 Bernardo Joffre G.3 500 Felix Franceschi Venturini  BRAZIL Head Agents   -  G.14 200 Thomas Wigan 250.00 4000.00 In Sterling from London   350.00 In Sterling from ... J / London  B. Sao Paulo G.14 300 Jan Van Schelle C. Curityba G.14 400 Noel Baillon 250.00 G.14 400 has credit balance as he has not spent his full budget authorization, -3-   COUNTRY NUMBER NAME SALARY BUDGET MEMORANDA  Brazil  cont'd  ' D.Shadow Organi zation G.14 500 Taves 150.00  Sub Agents  500.00 Milreis G.14 106  100.00   G.14 107 G.14 108  100.00  G. 4 010 Serafino Romualdi G. 4 020 Antonio Darocha Homen Christo G.14 500 E. Taves G.607 Henry Hogg 3000.00 Milreis 150.00 U.S.por raonuh X.io 300.00 Milreis X.24 .250.00 Milreis  X.9 . URUGUAY Head Agent   T- 1000.00 In Sterling from  j' London  Sub Agents  G.12 001 Norman Charles Palmer 200.00 Uruguay money G.12 002 Gordon Vaughan Bemays 100.00 Uruguay money G.12 003 Maynert Victor Theodore La Brooy  ARGENTINE Head Agent   200.00 2500.00  G.6000 H. J. Henman   G.6000 has credit balance as he has not spent his full budget authorization  Sub Agents  G.6550 M. C. Waldron  400.00 Argentine U.S. 94.80 Mrs. Jean Hale G.6100 Vasquez G.6001 Rosemary Emma Bantock Roberts  J.J.Blythman 250.00 Argentine qz oo  G.6004  G.6002  ujoq   Zczcr goo  G.6200 Chappara  G.6300 Maj. Mansfield H. J. Cherry . mO G.6400 Rewbendixen 600. 00 Argentine -ycow C.C.Horton Allowance 250 00 Argentine a. tr1  G.6600 Oi-LUo G.6700 Limpenny O 2 0 5 G.6800 H. Murray G.6900 Eduardo Gomez wgfe51   A OUJUJ   300. 00 Argentine G.6003 . QSf   100. 00 Argentine G.6008 X 1hr  I 3-CC . GO  336. 00 Argentine G.6500  2cl O05 OUJ..  Q t- CHILE Head Agent ' to  O co C  G.11 000 Major Harold Phillips 400 00 12000 Chilean pesos  3000.00, COUNTRY  Chile  cent'd  PERU  ECUADOR Quito  4 NUMBER NAME SALARY BUDOET MEMORANDA  Sub Agents  G.6151 Georgina Scott 4650 Chilean pesos 150.00 U.S. G.11 001 Mary Dignam 4650 n 150.00 U.S. G.11 100 Richard Hogge 10500 350.00 U.S. G.11 200 S. Larrain G.11 300 Reid G.11 302 E. Van Der Reis G. 11 303 W. Blummell G. 11 304 J. Pradenas G.11 305 H. Jutros Bianchi G.11 308 Hans Spier G. 11 320 H. Todman ' G.11 321 M. Raillard G.11 322 H. Howard Sub Agents  G.5 100 D. Thurmer -General Motors 'lie pay his car ex penses on his business. G.5 101 W. Southworth 325 Soles - 50 U.S. G.5 103 F. Roasia 325 - 50 U.S. G.5 104 R. MacMillan 325 - 50 U.S. G.5 H0 Arthur Hammond 1300 - 200 U.S.  G.5 H2 G.5 120 David Dudgeon -Central Railway of Peru No salary only out goings. Car part paid for by us. Wilson Vice-Consul No payment.  Head Agent  G.5 200 Ernest French 1 000.00 Paid through Legation in Quito.  Sub Agents  G.5 205 Jock Stewart - 150.00 U.S . G.5 210 Peter Sosha  600 Sucres   G.5 214  200 G.5 216 60 G.5 206 400 from October G.5 230 Jorge Robalino -200 G.5 231 Arturo Illingworth -200 G.5 232 250  G.5 221 G. Eluge G. 5 229 Eric Williams G.5 232 Espinosa ' G.5 280 Francisco Portilla  G.5 215, COUNTRY NUMBER MEXICO Head Agent G.408 CENTRAL AMERICA Head Agent San Jose 8c Costa Rica G.17 000 A. Costa Rica G.15 000 B. El Sal vador G.i3 qoo  Rep. Honduras G.13 200 D. British Honduras G.13 100 Nicaragua N/S Sub Agents G.17 001 G.17 002 TRINIDAD Head Agent G.18 000 Sub Agents G.18 001 G.18 002 G.18 003 G.18 004 G.18 005 G.18 006 G.18 007 G.18 100 G.18 300 G.18 400 -5-   NAME  M. Salvador Edward Scott  Alex Murray Jr.  Clive Smith.  Calvin Merriam  James Murphy   Custodian of S.O.Dump Raymond J. Kenne-tt  Robert Ormiston Knox Maria Carlotta Stagg  Verdi Gnudi  SALARY BUDGET   250.00   120.00  250.00 '  400.00  600.00 2000.00   80.00 500.00   325.00 400.00  50.00   150.00 U.S.  150.00 U.S.   150.00  MEMORANDA  Sent by telegram if  required Personal allowance Family Allowance  Paid by T.A.C.A.and we refund Yerex in New York  A.G.Samuel Formerly G.202 300.00  Miss M. McDougall 175.00 Henderson  H. Tennyson Miss Kaye Long Major General Stokes Robert O.C.British Troops Thompson Chief Censor Edgeworth Johnson Censorship J  M.I.5 R A S .0 .  0  - 9, , LIST OF ALL S.O. EMPLOYEES IN G-LAND.  FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES.  NAME. CAPACITY IN WHICH SALARY. ALLOWANCE. TOTAL REMARKS. EMPLOYED.  Colonel Louis Franck Head of Mission 400.00 400.00 Major H. A. Benson Deputy 400.00 400.00 Miss C. Stagg G.M. Secretariat 45.00 paid weekly.  Ivar Bryce South American Section 600.00 600.00 Gilbert Highet Ditto Intelligence 625.00 625.00  A.J. Halpern Head of Minorities 650.00 350.00 1000.00 Section. H.M. Sichel Ditto & Recruiting 600.00 150.00 750.00  H. Brooke Minorities Section 350.00 50.00 400.00 Mrs. P. Ordway Travel 250.00 250.00  Major B.P.Bouverie Head of Washington 400.00 400.00 Liaison Office.  Major J.R. Leonard Washington Liaison 400.00 400.00  Mrs. Bratby Secretary to Major 180.00 180.00 Leonard. Mrs. Wood Secretary to Major g 100.00 100.00 Bouverie Miss Myers Telephone operator 160.00 160.00  R. PChauffeur. Hardesty 162.48  162.48   ON LOAN.  Captain Mostyn Davies Seconded by N.Y. office 400.00 400.00 to South American Security Scheme.  Kenneth Wilson ditto ditto. 525.00 525-00 from 31.10.42.  S. Morrell Propaganda O.W.I. 600.00 150.00 750.00 Seconded to O.W.I. and paid by S.O. D.C. Brown ditto 550.00 550.00  to cover all expenses except train and aircraft fares., OFFICERS-comon services of which 50% is charged to S.O.   NrJiS.   Professor Bayly   A.E. Grubb Jl.P. Davidson   NAME.   Lt. Colonel Skilbeck   Major Dehn    laptain Pelham Burn   Captain Hannay   Captain Bushell   Lieutenant Walsh   CAPACITY IN WHICH ' EMPLOYED.   Communications - Head of Section.   Communications.   Supplies.   Supplies.   OFFICERS-   CAPACITY IN WHICH EMPLOYED.   O.C. S.T.S.103 S.T.S.103   ditto   ditto   ditto   ditto   SALARY. ALLOWANCE. TOTAL.   S.T.S. 103. SALARY. ALLOWANCE. TOTAL.   /900. /200. /l 100 360 in U.K.   /540. /l50. /690.   Paid by Canadian Military Authorities at normal Army rates and refunded by us. Local allowance of 100. paid by-S.O. out of which 50. used to refund loan.   Paid by Canadian Military Authorities at normal Army rates and refunded oy us., SECRETARIES   NAME.   Mrs. Aldford Mrs. Findlay Miss Cummer Miss Comrie Miss Summers Miss Penman Mrs. Rient Miss Cole Mrs. Douglas Miss Hopkins Miss MacMillan Miss Bickell Miss Knight ON LOAN Miss Lloyd   SECTION IN WHICH EMPLOYED.   G.M. Secretariat Ivar Bryce G.0.1 Gilbert Highet G.0.1 Head of A.J.Halpern Secretariat G.0.2 G. H. Translator G.0.2 G. Registry -Reader and Card Index Senior Filing Clerk -Registry Registry -Telegrams Registry -Bags and TK's H. C.C.O. -Pyke SALARY PAID WEEKLY.    40.00  37.50  37.50  42.50   0    37.50   '   M    37.50  50.00 0    35.00 Paid by S.I.S.    40.00    37.50    35.00    37.50 M    37.50 .    37.50, THE ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED IN DEPARMENT UNDER SECTION 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958., u   ' 4   o I ti o   I FILE NUMBER SUBJECT SOE HISTORY 45 Organisations in America VOLUME FROM 194 4 TO, S.O. ORGANIZATION / / GM Colonel Louis Franck JGM.200 Major J.R. Leonard   G.0.1 -Latin America n/ G.432 Captain G. Highet G.0.2 -Minorities -Jfi.AOO A.J. Halpem n/G.406 H.M. Sichel   G.A. -Administration  shared with SIS V G.209 H.H. Busfield   G.S. -Supplies  AD/ZU Wing Cdr. T.R. Bird ad/zup Major W. Fox now in UK -4 AD/ZUQ Mr. J.R. Collins G .210 Mr. A.E. Grubb G.142 Prof. Bayley  shared with SIS  G.T. Training MT/W Lieut.-7C0I. C. Skilbeck   MT/W1 Majop'T. Dehn /   G.427 Captain R.R. Hannay MT/W2 Major BusheU. ' Captain T Cooke Captain Walsh Hydra   Washington   GM.300 Lieut.-Col. B.P. Bouverie / G 140 Ivar Bryce   G.211 T.H. Wigan x Canada   G.9000 T.G. Drew-Brook  shared with SIS   South America   G.5200 Ernest French Ecuador G.11 100 Richard Hogge Chile G.5900 Norman Reynolds Colombia'/ G.3000 Norman Longe Venezuela V   ' .v.   India   Lieut /Colpnel H/j.P. Phillips LieutA Maiy Di nam   -TH'.S\S \   l3 ', LIST OF S.O. PERSONNEL IN WESTERN HEMISPHERE   OFFICERS   SECRETARIES   Colonel Louis Franck -Head of Mission Major J.R. Leonard -Deputy Lt.-Col. B.P. Bouverie -Head of Washington   Liaison Mission Ivar Bryce -Washington Office Captain T. Wigan -Washington Office Captain Gilbert Highet -Latin America Mr. A.J. Halpern -Head of Minorities Section Mr. H.M. Sichel -Minorities Section H H. Busfield -Accounts  Wing Cdr. T.R. Bird -Head of Supply Section Major Morland Fox -Supply Section Mr. J.R. Collins -Supply Section Mr. A.E. Grubb -Supply Section Prof. Bayley -Communications Lieut.-Colonel C.S. Skilbeck -S.T.S. 103 Major P. Dehn -S.T.S. 103 Major Bushell -Adjutant S.T.S. 103 Captain R.H. Hannay -S.T.S. 103 Captain T.W. Cooke Captain Walsh -S.T.S. 103 Hydra   T.G. Drew-Brook -Canada Ernest French -Observer at Ecuador Richard Hogge -Observer at Chile Norman Reynolds -Observer at Colombia Norman Longe -Observer at Venezuela Lt.-Colonel H.P.J. Phillips -India Lieut. Mary Dignam -Secretary to Col. Phillips Mr. Dan Fisher -Chauffeur Washington Office   Miss Geraldine Dack -Head of GM Secretariat Miss Lorraine Hopkins -GM Secretariat Mrs. E.L. Wood -Secretary to Colonel Bouverie Miss E. Myers -Telephone Operator Washington Kathleen Long-Latin America Elsa Comrie -Head of Minorities Secretariat Elaine Knight -Minorities Section Mrs. T.B. Law -Minorities Section Mrs. G. Rient -Translator Minorities Section Helen Summers -Minorities Section Nora Kelly -Minorities Section Yvonne Second -Supplies Section Ruth Ferguson -Supplies Section Mrs. G.E. Campbell -Supplies Section Miss Margaret McGill -Supplies Section Miss Lois Macmillan -Registry Mrs. M.E. Findlay -Registry Miss Georgina Scott -Santiago Chile. Miss Helen Shaw -Bogota Colombia.   THIS ISA COPY j  ORIGINAL DOCUMENT RETAINED 1 IN DEPARTMENT UNDER SECTION ' 3 4 OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS ACT 1958, INDEX 1. Notes on the Present S.O. Organization in the Western Hemisphere 2. Section G.0.1 -Latin America 3. Section G.0.2 -Minorities and Emigre Groups 4. G.A. -Administration 5-G.T. -S.T.S. 103 6. G.S. -Supplies 7. British Offices In Washington 8. S.O.E. Washington 9. Memorandum on the Future of S.O.E. in Washington, NOTES ON THE PRESENT S.O. ORGANIZATION IN THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE   G.M. SECTION The head of the S.O. Mission in America is Colonel Louis Franck and his deputy is Major J.R. Leonard. Colonel Franck is responsible in the U.S.A. to W.S. Stephenson who is in charge throughout the Western Hemisphere of not only S.O. but S.I. and Security. .As at present constituted S.O.E. in the Western   Hemisphere comprises the following sections  1 Latin America G.0.1  2 Minorities G.0.2  3 Administration in which is included the expenses of the Toronto Office  G.A.  4 GM/OSS Liaison GM/OSS  5 Training G.T.  6 Supplies G.S.  Over the past six months the average expenses of the organization have been 37 800 per month plus a changing amount of Sterling ranging up to 1 000 pounds per month. The expenses of the individual sections were as follows   G.0.1  5 200 G.0.2 5 600 G.A. ' 11 500 GM/OSS 4 400 G.T. 9 200 G.S. 1.900  37 800  G.0.1 now costing 1 600 per month plus 1 000 pounds per month., SECTION G.O.l -LATIN AMERICA   A. Unless it is decided to maintain the S.O.E. Organization after the war ends it is felt that the time has come to consider the advisability of closing down the remaining S.O.E. Organization in Latin America. On the other hand if S.O.E. is to continue after the war then it is suggested that plans should be made now to adapt the S.O.E. Organization in Latin America to post war conditions. B. Background 1. The strategic and economic importance of South America is great and will increase as modern methods of transportation and industrial development are more widely applied. 2. It is essential that British interests should not be entirely elninated from this region. If we use the proper methods we have more chance of maintaining and improving our position than have the Americans -who like the Gennans before the war are attempting to take the whole place over and will provoke a reaction. 3. The function of S.O.E. in South America is to translate information into action at a level below that of diplomacy and using methods not open to diplomatic missions. It differs from S.I.S. because the latter merely reports to British government departments without taking action. For example S.I.S. might penetrate an anti-British political party but only to report on itj S.O.E. can penetrate it and destroy it or convert it to our purposes. 4 For many years after the war the world will be full of conflicting interests and new revolutionary ideas. These conflicts and movements cannot now be foreseen. By maintaining S.O.E. in South America we are insuring against being caught defenceless by the unforeseen. C. Existing Organization. 1. We have observers in Chile Colombia Ecuador and Venezuela and can also call on former agents in Brazil Peru and Uruguay. 2. These observers have broken up their organization but maintain many unpaid contacts so that they could rebuild in a short time. 3. We also have a large quantity of records in New York., -2-   D. Post-war Organization. 1. There are six territories to be covered Argentina and Uruguay Brazil Chile Colombia and Venezuela Ecuador and Peru Bolivia and Paraguay.   Mexico Central America and the Caribbean area are omitted as under U.S.   domination.   2. An S.O.E. agent should be permanently stationed in each country. He must be a British subject who has lived there for many years and can use his own occupation as cover. His relations with the Legation should be arranged according to the conditions of each territory but he should preferably not have diplomatic status. 3. There should be a central office in the Embassy at Washington its head would be responsible to S.O.E./London. E. Objectives of Post-war Organization. 1. To link up with S.O.E. throughout the world for instance in recruiting agents pooling intelligence and plans on world-wide developments etc. 2. To report upon and to influence through unofficial or unacknowledgeable methods  a trends in internal politics such as nationalism communism anti-British reactions.  b foreign relations wars and alliances with neighbouring countries friendly or unfriendly to us resurgence of German influence encroachment by Russia the U.S.A. and other powers.  c economic developments which in South America particularly are often open to influence by covert methods -bribery black propaganda personal pressure. 3. To act as permanent liaison between YP and YS and local commercial and political circles. This is particularly desirable because professional members of missions rarely stay long enough in one station to acquire an intimate knowledge of the country.   4. To establish a shadow system of British subjects and friendly nationals which will defend our interests in the event of war or revolution., SECTION G.0.2 -MINORITIES AND EMIGRE GROUPS   This section is under the control of Mr. A.J. Halpem who is assisted by Mr. H.M. Sichel. Until recently this section also employed H. Brook and C.D. Belfrage S.I.S. .   This section provides a great deal of information on Minority Movements in the United States and their aspirations Copies of their reports are sent to SO/London and in many cases also to S.I. and the Embassy.   Mr. Halpem pays regular visits to the Embassy in Washington where his advice on Minorities matters and European Politics generally is greatly appreciated.   Mr. Sichel in addition to his work on Minorities matters has been responsible for all the administrative detail connected with the recruitment and despatch of agents. He is also the chief liaison officer with S.T.S. 103 and he has useful contacts in Canadian Government Departments., SECTION G.A. -ADMINISTRATION   Major H.H. Busfield is in charge of the accounts for the whole of the British Security Co-Ordination. Completely separate accounts are kept for S.O.E. however and S.O.E. is charged each month with an agreed proportion of the total expense of the D.S.C.'s Organization.   The expenses shown for this section include our one-third share of the cost of the Toronto Office., G.T. -S.T.S. 103 In accordance with the decision reached in your cable 916 and cable 935 of February 21st   S.T.S. 103 will shortly be closed down. Detailed instructions for closing the school are now awaited from London. A detailed statement of the position of the school at the moment is attached., STATEMENT ON S.T.S. 103   Is at25th February 1944   The Property   a Buildings.   The property comprises approximately 280 acres of   rough farm land and the following buildings are at   present erected on it   i O kitchen and ablution facilities.   ii S and ablution facilities giving accommodation for approximately ten Sergeants and forty Other Ranks. A small gymnasium is also included in this building.   iii G giving accommodation for approximately ten persons.   iv H hydra male staff operations rooms and six military personnel with kitchen and ablution facilities.   v T   vi F toilet facilities for ten men. It also includes the Men s Canteen Recreation Room Sick Bay and Quartermaster Stores.   vii P facilities for eight men.   viii A offices and large lecture hall divided at present into two.   ix T accommodation for approximately eight vehicles numerous small outbuildings for storage purposes and three magazines for explosives or other stores., b Taxes. The property lies in two townships namely Whitby and East Whitby. Since Rural Realty Limited took over the property taxes have not been paid but the following points are noteworthy   i An appeal by Rural Realty Limited to the County Court for a relief of local taxation was made and judgment was given in favour of the Company by the Court so that no taxes have been paid to this township.   East Whitby Township in 1941 assessed the property   ii   as farm land together with the original farm buildings at 269.00. In 1942 a stay on taxation was arranged by the then Commandant in conjunction with the Township authorities. In lieu of such taxes an ex gratia payment of 269.00 for road service and maintenance was made and an assurance obtained from the Township that this did not constitute a payment against assessment. No further assessment or payment has been made in 1943.   2. Proposition for Future Tenant. It would appear that the most obvious future owner or tenant of the establishment known as S.T.S. 103 would be Hydra . Since it is virtually certain that Hydra will continue outside agencies such as Canadian Army or some civilian institution would be very unlikely to accept the property in view of the presence of Hydra and it would be unsuitable to move Hydra. Therefore it seems that provided an agreement can be reached between S.0. and Hydra on a valuation of the property the establishment can be handed over without any appreciable break in control or seriously disturbing the arrangements as at present in force for administering and running the establishment., 3 Continuity. There is a strong argument in favour of endeavouring to maintain some continuity in the running of this establishment both from the point of view of Hydra and in the event of the site being required by S.O. at a later stage. It can be argued that a complete break with the various military and civilian agencies who have so ably served S.T.S. 103 in the past would be very difficult to re-open at a later stage. There fore the present owners might consider it advisable to retain a controlling interest and would have some interest in the arrangements made for administering the establishment in its new form. E.g. -The retention of such officers and personnel as are considered necessary and the retention of the property as a military unit within the command of   M.D. No. 2. 4- Militarization. Whilst it is not the direct concern of the present Commandant whether Hydra militarizes its personnel or not nevertheless having regard to the above arguments and the experience gained over some twenty months it is strongly urged that the personnel be militarized to the maximum thus facilitating the absorption of staff and handing over process.   5. Staff Disposal a Officers.   The establishment at present consists of four British Officers and two Canadian. The four British Officers will become available for any position in which they are qualified to serve. It is anticipated that the British Officers can be made available as follows   Lieut-Colonel C. Skilbeck Commandant -When handing over to -new command is completed.   Major P.E. Dehn Chief Instructor -Approximately Mid-March depending on the circumstances., Captain R.W. Rainsford-Hannay Instructor -10th March. Will require seven days to wind up personal affairs in U.S.   Captain T.W. Cooke Demolitions Instructor -As soon as -shippingof stores is completed.   Captain T.A. Walsh Canada is now in charge of Hydra for technical purposes and will therefore presumably remain in that position.   Major A.J. Bushell Canada Administrative Officer since    the opening of the establishment would appear to be a very suitable recommendation to take over command of the entire establish ment under the direction of Lieut-Colonel Bayley.   t   Other Ranks.   As at this date the Other Rank effective personnel is forty-six of which two are Sergeant Instructors See sub-para i ten are C.W.A.C. personnel and six are provost detachment for guard purposes.   i The two Sergeant Instructors referred to above are willing to serve overseas with S.O. provided that arrangements can be made between S.O. and N.D.H.Q.. for their loan to British Army. Personal details regarding these men -See App. A .   ii The remainder of the Other Rank personnel will be   disposed of in accordance with requirements. I.e. - Those supernumerary to the new establishment to be returned to the Canadian Army the remainder retained by Hydra.   c Civilians.   There are at present four civilians employed on the property three paid by Project J and one ty Hydra. The retention of this civilian staff would be necessary for purposes of boiler building and technical equipment maintenance.   Equipment.   a Ordnance.   There is at present a substantial amount of barrack stores which includes five army vehicles on charge from M.D. No. 2 in all the buildings including the present Hydra building. In the event of Hydra continuing as a military unit these, stores can of course be vouchered over. In the event of this not being realized such equipment would of necessity have to be returned to M.D. No. 2.   b Civilian Purchase.   A considerable quantity of fixtures fittings and furniture was installed at the time of the original building or subsequently purchased as additional equipment. A complete inventory of such fittings etc. with an approximate valuation is appended. See Appendix B . It will be noticed that this includes three vehicles purchased by B.S.C. New York.   7. Training and Equipment and Stores. A quantity of training equipment and stores for purely training purposes is on hand. Detailed stock records are   appended herewith. See Appendix C .   There appears to be three possible ways of disposing of such stores   i The complete stock   ii The retention of for possible further use at a future date. Sufficient storage accommodation for an indefinite period is avail able. I.e. -The magazines built especially for this purposes. Maintenance staff could easily be arranged.   iii The possible shipping another theatre. E.G. -Australia.   8. Conclusion. It is understood from Lieut-Colonel Bayley that it will be impossible for his department to arrive at a definite decision until the third week in March at the earliest. Until this formal decision has been reached it is difficult to make arrangements in detail for the liquidation of S-T.S. 103 but all the preliminary work that can be done will be undertaken forthwith  signed C. Skilbeck Lt-Col., APPEMDIX A11   B.80A81 Set. Clayton J.K.   Age -22. Married. Joined Army -29th June 1942. Taken on strength S.T.S. 103 -6th July 1942. Appointed Range Orderly and subsequently Junior N.C.O. Instructor Yfeapon Training -4th December 1942. Promoted Sergeant Instructor Weapon Training   and Close Combat -26th April 1943-   Has a thorough knowledge of small arms. Is a thoroughly well trained and capable instructor in small arms and close combat. He is a keen and enthusiastic type and has proved himself capable of handling classes of students. Is willing and anxious to serve   overseas.   B.80261 Sgt. McClure A.W.   Age -27. Single. Joined Army -18th May 1942. Taken on strength S.T.S. 103 -29th June 1942. Appointed Junior N.C.O. Demolitions Instructor -1st December 1942. Promoted Sergeant Demolitions Instructor -24th August 1943-   A capable instructor who has learned to handle and instruct in the general explosives and devices included in the S.O.E. syllabus of training. He has been found reliable and capable of handling classes of students. Is willing and anxious to serve overseas., G.S. -SUPPLIES The Technical Mission was established in June 1943 to -a co-ordinate research and development work in America b be responsible for co-ordination of ordering   supplies of all types in America c act as Advisory Board available to O.S.S. The work of the mission has followed the lines laid   down in the above charter. In the development field a number of devices have been finalised Petrol Tank Device Thermite Well Container Locator Clockwork Fuze Sympathetic Fuze   Allways Fuze Grenade and several others are nearing completion. In addition the packaging problem with particular reference to tropical conditions is being studied. During the period under review the N.B.R.C. research laboratory was established and is now playing an increasingly important part.   On the supplies side many difficulties have been encountered but a satisfactory procedure has now been established. The advisory work with O.S.S. has been an important part of its work. Relations with O.S.S. are very satisfactory and excellent co-operation is maintained.   2. Future Policy. a Development. A very ambitious and comprehen sive programme is in hand. Details have been sent in the various fortnightly reports. London H.Q. must decide how much they are interested in this programme and indicate whether they wish to initiate work or any of their outstanding problems. I do not think that I am receiving sufficient support from London in this connection. It would be very helpful if an authoritative forward, picture of the lines along which development should be pushed   could be supplied say every three or six months. This would   enable me to exert pressure to accelerate the development of   those items in which there is greatest interest.   The criticisms and comments of Stations IX and XII on the points raised in my reports have been very helpful and the arrangements made during my last visit home are working   very well.   b Supplies. G.210 has done an outstandingly good job and he deserves the greatest praise for the efficient manner in which he handles your orders and shipments. With no staff at all he has to act as a miniature British supply mission. I do not believe that you are making the fullest use of the manufacturing facilities available here and I recommend that immediate attention be given to the consideration of placing future orders particularly with reference to supplying the Far East. If no further orders are placed the production side will have completed outstanding orders by about July.   c Radio. The position with regard to both the development and supply of radio items is very unsatisfactory. If the U.S. facilities are worth making use of then a competent radio officer must be attached to my staff. At the moment O.S.S. must feel that you do not consider American radio of sufficient importance to attach one man. I think the O.S.S. radio section   V   could be of very considerable assistance to us. At present they co-operate very well and all your recent requests have been dealt with very expeditiously., 3. Staff. Even with AD/ZUP here the volume of work is such that there is not sufficient time available to supervise adequately the work being carried out by the various N-D.R.C. contractors. In his absence it is quite impossible to do so and I propose to use E/DZ2 on some of the production problems as well as on the spigot until AD/ZUP returns.   Additional help is required for G.210 but this can be provided locally., 9th February 1944   BRITISH OFFICES IN WASHINGTON   British organizations in Washington fall under three main headings   1. The Embassy headed by the British Ambassador Lord Halifax -consisting of Chancery War Trade Department British Information Services Political Warfare Executive Mission and Treasury representatives. 2. The Services headed by Sir John Dill -consisting of the Joint Staff Mission the British Army Staff The British Admiralty Delegation and the RAF Delegation. 3. Supply organization headed ty Mr. Ben Smith British Minister Resident for Supply -consisting of the British Supply Council in North America the British Supply Mission and various other supply missions such as the Food Mission the Raw Materials Mission etc. and the various Service Supply Missions. So far as No. 1 is concerned while the Embassy works more or less independently of the other missions in Washington and is mainly concerned with political questions it is in close contact with all the other missions and provides the channel of communica tion for all messages between the Prime Minister and the President. There is a weekly meeting every Saturday attended by the Heads of the Service and Supply Missions under the Chairmanship of the Ambassador to keep all concerned au fait with HMG's political policy. The War Trade Department which represents the Ministry of Economic Warfare and the British Information Services which represents the Ministry of Information are headed by Mr. Guy Thorrold and Mr. Harold Butler respectively. The Political Warfare Executive Mission headed by Mr. David Bowes-Lyon while housed in the Embassy operates indepen dently for PWE. Reasonably close contact is maintained with this Mission by SOE Washington. The Treasury representative until recently Sir David Waley while working under the aegis of the Embassy operates, independently and is not even housed in the Embassy building.   The Service representation in Washington is headed by Sir John Dill who is the personal representative of the Prime Minister in his capacity as Minister of Defence. He is head of the British Joint Staff Mission the chief function of which is to represent the British Chiefs of Staff on the Combined Chiefs of Staff Committee. In addition to Sir John Dill this Committee consists of on the British side Lt.-General Macready Admiral Sir Percy Noble and Air Marshal Welsh representing respectively C.I.G.S. the First Sea Lord and the C.A.S.   The American members are Admiral Leahy personal representative of the President General Marshall Chief of Staff Admiral King Commander in Chief of the U.S. Navy and General Arnold Commanding General of the U.S. Army Air Force.   The Joint Staff Mission is supported by a Secretariat headed by Brigadier Redman who has as his assistant Commander R.D. Coleridge. They act in the dual capacity of Secretaries to the Joint Staff Mission and the Joint Secretariat of the Combined   Chiefs of Staff.   In addition to the Joint Staff Mission the War Office is represented in Washington by the British Army Staff commanded by General Macready. In conjunction with the supply missions B.A.S. handles Army procurement and provides technical liaison with the Americans on all military matters.   The Navy is represented in Washington by the British Admiralty Delegation headed by Admiral Sir Percy Noble. This Delegation is divided into a variety of groups such as the British Admiralty Maintenance Group which handles the equipping and repair of H.M. Ships in U.S. dockyards the British Admiralty Supply Group which handles all equipment etc.   The Air Ministry is represented by the RAF Delegation, headed by Air Marshal Welsh. This Delegation handles all technical   liaison on construction etc. as well as the handling of the   training programmes now running in this country.   The Supply organization in Washington headed by Mr. Ben Smith the Resident Minister is an extremely complicated one. It is headed by the British Supply Council in North America on which sit the Heads of all the various Supply Missions both Service and civilian. These include the British Supply Mission the Food Mission the Raw Materials Mission the British Air Commission and others. This body serves to co-ordinate all the various missions and to prevent overlapping.   The Secretary of the Supply Council in North America is Mr. F.R-Hoyer Millar who is also the Head of the British Civil Secretariat which together with the Secretariat of the Joint Staff Mission represents the Secretariat of the Cabinet Offices in London.   Without going into great detail it would be impossible to give any adequate description of the functions of all the supply missions. Suffice it to say that SOE liaison is in touch with such of them as is necessary and so far has been able to secure through them what has been required.   The above description of the British offices in Washington is extremely general. It is hoped that it gives some picture of what has been set up though it is impossible again without going into great detail to show the interrelationship between all the above organizations.   So far as SOE is concerned the Joint Staff Mission is the most important and the one to which in addition to the Embassy we look for advice and help., 8th February 1944-   S.O.E. WASHINGTON 1. History S.O.E. has had a Washington representative since November 1941 .when Lt.-Colonel Bouverie was transferred from New York to Washington for the purpose of establishing liaison with the then embryo S.O. Branch of O.S.S. He was joined early in 1942 by Captain Hannay who attended to routine matters such as priorities transportation etc. In July and August 1942 he was joined by four officers from London Colonel Masterson Mr. John Keswick Lt.-Colonel Sweet-Escott and Captain Mostyn-Davies. These men did much to assist the S.O. Branch in O.S.S. in getting established although unfortunately due to many changes of personnel in this Branch much of their effort was wasted. They were all gradually withdrawn Colonel Sweet-Escott being the last to leave in   February 1943.   Colonel Bouverie carried on the liaison through the summer of 1943 from time to time assisted by Major Leonard. He was joined in the autumn of 1943 by Mr. Ivar Bryce and Captain Thomas Wigan. These three now form the Washington liaison for S.O.E.   2. Activities The main functions of the S.O.E. office in Washington are to maintain liaison with   A. 0 S S B. British Joint Staff Mission. The liaison with O.S.S. now that Mr. Scribner is in charge has got onto a much better footing than it was previously. In Appendix I there is a rough outline of the present, O.S.S. organization. Liaison is maintained not only with all the Sections of the S.O. Branch but also with the Executive Office and with the Planning Group. The Supply Section in New York maintains liaison with the Supply Section of O.S.S. and with the Communications Section on technical matters direct and not through the Washington Office.   The main responsibility for liaison with O.S.S. has been with Mr Bryce.   The liaison with the British Joint Staff Mission is for the purpose of ensuring that S.0.E.'s needs are properly pre sented as and when required to the Combined Chiefs of Staff. The liaison is maintained principally through the Secretariat See Appendix II although from time to time there is close connection also with the Joint Planning Staff and with the members of the Joint Intelligence Committee.   As an example Colonel Bouverie was asked to sit as an adviser on the sub-committee of the Combined Staff Planners for working on the problem of supply and equipment for Resistance Groups. There is little doubt that if he had not done so the matter might have very well got completely out of hand particularly in view of the attitude of many of the American members.   In addition to the above main functions close liaison is maintained with the British Embassy who are responsible for dealing with the political aspects of some of S.O.E.'s problems.   As examples of this we might quote questions such as policy for Siam and policy for Jugoslavia.   In addition. Captain Wigan is responsible for the securing of all priorities for the movements of passengers and freight a function which required considerable tact., APPENDIX I   OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES ORGANIZATION   1. History The Office of Strategic Services was created by Presidential Directive in July 1941 under the name of The Office of the Co-ordinator of Information. Under this directive C.O.I. was authorized in vague terms to carry on S.I. S.O. and P.W.E. activities. In June 1942 its constitution was altered as well as its name and it became The Office of Strategic Services directly responsible to the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff and no longer part of the Executive Office of the President.   Subsequent to that date it received two directives from the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff the second of which clearly defined the scope of its activities and definitely established it as the agency authorized to carry out Secret Intelligence Special Operations and under-cover propaganda. It is under this directive which was issued on the 27th of October 1943 that OSS is at present operating.   2. Present Set-Up Under its director Brigadier General W.J. Donovan there are set up four main Branches   A. The Executive Office Secretariat and Planning Group. B. Intelligence Services. C. Special Operations. D. Services. The Executive Office which comes directly under the Deputy Director Colonel G.E. Buxton is responsible to the Director for the general co-ordination of all Branches and for the clearing, of all projects with the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff   to whom has been attached a special officer for dealing with all   OSS matters.   The Planning Group which also is directly res   ponsible to the Director and consists of four members of OSS   including the Chairman two members from the Army two from the   Navy and one from the State Department is responsible for the   formulation of over-all plans and for seeing that they are duly   executed.   The Chairman of the Planning Group is Mr. Hugh Wilson the last American Ambassador in Berlin who recently succeeded Dr. James Rogers.   In addition to the above there is an organization directly responsible to the Deputy Director under Colonel Richards called the OSS Theatre Officers. In the past there have been four such officers one responsible for Western Europe one for North Africa one for the Middle East and one for the Far East who are charged with the responsibility of co-ordinating the activities of all the Branches in their respective areas. They have no executive authority they act purely in an advisory capacity.   The Intelligence Services are divided into three main groups   A. Secret Intelligence Group. B. Research and Analysis Group. C. Foreign Nationalities Group. The Assistant Director in charge is Brigadier General John Magruder and their functions briefly are as follows   A. The collection of Intelligence by secret or undercover means. B. The production and compilation of Intelligence appreciations including map making which is done in a special typographical branch. C. The study of foreign nationality groups in this country in conjunction with the State Department., The Services Branch covers supplies finance security communications and training. The S.O. Branch which is under the command of Mr.   J.M. Scribner who is an Assistant Director of O.S.S. is divided into four groups A. Special Operations. B. Morale Operations. C. Operational Groups. D. Maritime Units. Each of these Sections operates under their own Chief who is immediately responsible to Mr. Scribner either directly or through his Deputy Lt. Colonel E. Bigelow.   The function of the S.O. Branch as visualized by Mr. Scribner is more the implementation by way of provision of trained personnel and equipment to the field rather than the formulation of policy or plans which are left to the Executive Office of the Director and the Planning Group respectively.   Each of the Sections of the S.O. Branch are for their turn divided into geographical sections covering the respective theatres, APPENDIX II   BRITISH JOINT STAFF MISSION IN WASHINGTON   The British Joint Staff Mission in Washington is composed of the Washington representatives of the British Chiefs of Staff and a series of supporting Committees.   The Washington representatives are Field Marshal Sir John Dill representing the Minister of Defence. Admiral Sir Percy Noble representing the First Sea Lord. Lt.-General G.N. Macready representing the C.I.G.S. Air Marshal Welsh representing the C.A.S.   They are supported by a Secretariat the Head of which is Brigadier Redman who is assisted by Commander R.D. Coleridge Wing Commander T.E. Birley Major J. Davison and Major   K. Garnett. The first two are Secretary and Assistant Secretary of the Joint Staff Mission and Joint Secretary and Assistant Secretaiy of the Combined Chiefs of Staff. The other members of the Secretariat act as Secretaries to the Committees enumerated below. The supporting organization consists of   1. The Joint Planning Staff of which the senior members are Brigadier McNair Captain Porter and Air Commodore Warburton Secretary Major Davison. 2. The Joint Intelligence Committee of which the senior members are Lt.-Colonel Bebb Chairman Captain Wynne Colonel Cook Group Captain DuBoulay and Sir George Sansom Secretaiy Major Davison. In addition to this the Joint Staff Mission provides   the British members for the following combined committees   1. The Combined Munitions Assignment Board of which General Macready is the senior British member and Wing Commander Birley Joint Secretary., 2. The Combined Civil Affairs Committee of which also General Macready is the senior British member and Wing Commander Birley Joint Secretary. 3. The Combined Administrative Committee on which Major General Anderson is the senior British memberj and Major Garnett Joint Secretary. 4. The Combined Communications Board of which Brigadier Sykes is the senior British member and Major Garnett Joint Secretary. Closely allied to the Joint Staff Mission is the British Civil Secretariat headed by Mr. F.R. Hoyer-Millar until recently Counsellor at the British Embassy. The Secretariat of the Joint Staff Mission and the British Civil Secretariat jointly for civil and military affairs respectively represent the Cabinet Secretariat in London., 9th February 1944   MEMORANDUM ON THE FUTURE OF SOE IN WASHINGTON   Up till the present time the SOE Washington liaison has been very much more concerned with SOE and OSS acti vities in Europe whether based on England or the Mediterranean than on problems in connection with the Far East or Australia. While from time to time questions in connection with these latter two territories have come up they have never been considered either by ourselves OSS or the Joint Staff Mission as being so important or urgent as questions concerning the European theatres.   The time is rapidly approaching when this is going to change. With the advancement of the plans for OVERLORD ANVIL etc. and therefore the completion of the arrangements for SOE and/or OSS participation in these operations the number of questions which can come up before the Combined Chiefs of Staff in connection with Western Europe must of necessity diminish leaving the decisions for future changes to the actual Commanders in the theatres of operation.   Equally so far as OSS/SO are concerned the selection and training of personnel and the provision of supplies etc. for Western Europe must either now or very shortly be completed if such personnel and supplies are to take an effective part in the operations.   On the other hand the problems in connection with the Far East and the war against Japan whether these problems arise from operations based on India Australia or elsewhere are likely so far as the Washington liaison is concerned to assume far greater importance in the very near future., In these theatres our arrangements for operating in conjunction with OSS are still very uncertain and there are many possibilities of changes of command etc. which may seriously concern SOE. All such questions will certainly be subjects for discussion by the Combined Chiefs of Staff in Washington.   The members of the present liaison mission whether in Washington or New York have been chosen essentially for their knowledge and experience of European and Balkan affairs. The problems of the Far East and of the war against Japan will clearly require different or additional personnel. The necessity of expert knowledge has been clearly brought out in the case of the Siamese problem where if it had not been for Major Grut's visit here we should have been at a serious disadvantage.   While admittedly the war in Europe is not yet over it is still not too early to consider the matter now since it is likely that many of the major decisions concerning the conduct of the Far Eastern war will be taken in the not very distant future.   In order to be prepared for 11118 and bearing in mind that there is a strong tendency on the part of the Americans to wish to run the Far Eastern war in their own way it is clearly desirable to have available in Washington sufficient officers with good Far Eastern experience to enable them to maintain SOE's position vis-a-vis both OSS and the Joint Staff Mission and through them the Combined Chiefs of Staff.,  .0.1. H VTort.'   SOE HISTORY 46 SOE ACTIVITIES IN U.S.A. VOLUME AND LATIN AMERICA 1940 -1944 FROM TO , ialmrltie.s AiaongBt th adaortty groups organic-tlcaaa w ra started lajig aga  pa. MBHl pHL5 I . ... ' txa i . .   f  aiad grottps cat-1 11shed to watch Ha d mgmts  Propacandiu A political mxfam aw Agu to wfyx a SJhAmn oad Mi idJaMtestem Sseatrea was put into operatiou throu ostomildy aiK/rtmm btem&cmt in fiitom languages ov r fcls amt powen ul /. aerico atatiom.  The Far astern oeotian fooaed in 1941 arranged for publication in U.S. I jtjsa at suitablesaterialendorganisedteoadosstsforintmialandfroignoonatssr tlm. ueaflsts and peuaihlets in Japanese w re distributed asacaag t -ps se oo.'tuisrdties in the V i.A and  south Ansrioa   O.E. traced e report on Oewen ubveanslve activit os in Japan -whidi was ooragdled from ofx i.. i l aouroas f and with the agreefflant of an. Jtaericaii Jountsalist who had recently r.-ttxmed from that countiy arraagcd for the contents to be published under his signature in a leedp ing Sew Xork newspaper. On publioation of the article in the U /u the wterial contained therein was quoted extensively in a aeries of broadcasts to the Far K&ot and widely used by lo 1 radio cowujexitfitors. In fifay 1941 Dr K ieieth a German diplofaat airlvod in the U.8. with the ohjectt at b ing up Anerican-ooned oil properties in Eastern Europe and contacting all b. 8. political groups favouring isolationism in m attempt to hinder of the t0u&4&am MU  took motion resulting in Rieth being pestered by tl-xe newspapers for tea hys after wbich he was taken into custody by the F.3 1 faasd. eventually expelled from the ocuntry.   In 1940 the I.u Farbeniadustrie a owerful and dangerous coacom doing uudh harm Uuough its oonuootimae with the various ocEa anioa of standard Oil ms attacked through its Vioe-Fresident A aamn-Amerioan named von .Rath Two weeks of pressure r ojjag ma cooaiderably publtnieing hie n ee and aotivities brjugiit about hie resignation in Deoeaber   ind OTtntually resulted in the Feffeea interests in the Q.G being t ken over by nomtoees of  U. . euti ritios. After the entry of the U. a. A. into the war 3 .K confined its aotivitiee to con-. tact with the adaenltifls and liaisem vdth o.a.d in the establiafaBmiifc of whieh m usdee Horn tig heei f fee . . . n ' . iNdtfM bed ini mi mmAA nM f4   Liaison. In June 1943 a ted nicel sub mlWion was set up which works in doe touch with 0.3 8 there being a llh rsl eedian of views rsad aeeintanoe in matters of K-amrc&i and supply.  In Sovaaber 1941 an a. . retro r.t&tivn w-a appointed ia -ftshington for fee pufwt  c llalaen with fee British Joint Staff Mission wife bociy th closest relationship h e Evince existed  308 December 1941 a school ms o rj 1 in Canada for training peraonml in 3 0.-fi. I methods of warfare Officer from fee Sew Xozk Bead Office Chief Agmsts in Latin Amxitem. end iMuht re of 0 '-.- and F.B I were tr inod at tlda school.  Canadians Jugoslavs It lians Hungirinne BoomandLeM Bulgariaam eta reasrulted in Cesmtie weiw trained at the school bS it was then arr n09d for fee majority of them to be infiltrated into Europe.  L flh ' iRICA. Tns work of .. .0 K agents who wtre posted in most Latin Axaerioaa ootuatries. r.allied in the following successful operationss-   Bollvia. Warming fee anti -\xia Gov ma nt of a projeoted isasi-dnsired revolt not only stresgihened feeir position but J.ed to fee adoption of uEuairous security SMwmirss and encouraged a wav of aati-KsM feeling extoading to fe ti. . .   Bra .11 The securing of a letter wlioh was siawn to Un -weMaat resulted In fee   XV lien xSa Air line oonoession in Brasil being revoked supplied to the jPedics by our local agent w s responsible for the arrest and iamaemmiAm. of mfey Bonuser  ' and the breskmp of the dtolte espionags groegs Ooloableu The arrest and deport tion of % sjoraana - aa obtained and fee rising Fascist Party destroyed. Chile. -The use of jeraoasl influenoe m cebdaet izdoters led to fee rupture of .rolrticaas ith fee Aide i. eitfAi.cg . Proof wm aatebliahed of pre Cemsn sotivi.ty of Fresi nt e ferofeer-iiv-ls find fee wore sutenitfed of mry daafiereus G r r.as for deportation fee estehUahOKSit Of s conocntr'ticn caap being obtained for the CSmaindeav   Ar ntina A xaap drsm up an Berlin showing the proposed partitioning of aeufe America ey V. 5 was obteitad fToa tin German Iktoemy and dwn t IbfetsiceKt Rooscvtdt. this aw akened the people of the D.8.A. to the fact th t Hitler else had deeighB on fee tfcstem hemisph're.   Veneguela. beverel ixafmvtmi Qaxmm mi Ck Mn firaa were axpellad or blaek-linted As a result of4 our local agent s activities.   0 rttral /.laerica. The passing of fee Erpropariation .few ly the Costa Moan Cor res rasulTing in the elimin tic of all German emmseaw was .0. . inspired. . gents made n Aerial survey of Central mcrlca and prepsfOd a Itaag list of S. LF.targota.   Uruguay. In 1942 the Hadio Qontinemtsl'' in lantowidoo a powi rful AadLa ptrapagnada atetion was ccsmlstolv deatrovroL SM infetfe ALrlomrf d down em 1st October 1944 with agreement of the F.o., Personal   53 J   To 0. From G432 tvJuV Report Number 30/472 November 13th 1944.  AD tells me that in making a survey of SOE activities you have found it difficult to recall exactly what we have done in the United States and Latin America. From G4O6 you will no doubt know the achievements of the Minorities'1 section. However G101 and his Propaganda section have disappeared and his Far Eastern experts also and now the South American organization has been closed down. But these were all responsible for a lot of interesting and valuable work while they lasted -although it was usually quite different in method from the work of SOE in an active theatre such as France or the Balkans. Nearly all of it was indirect. Thus the GP section inspired American propagandists to write and claim credit for articles assisting our cause on material supplied by us.    35500 . Gl O and others supplied the local South American police forces with the proofs that certain Germans were engaged in subversive activity the police dt the arrests and claimed the credit but the aim of putting Germans put of action and destroying their influence was achieved.   G has instructed me to make a survey of all the work done by all    kA.    A-' the different branches of British Security Co-ordination. After it is finished I hope to send you a detailed account of the best jobs done by our people here. Meanwhile I append a very short summary of the main heads under which we worked. It could and should be expanded for instance GP's    rumour organization had some remarkable successes the best of which ZN s i / f t, -2   rumour about an Axis naval display off South America just before the Rio Conference would take two or three pages to explain in detail. So also   zr. /tf s   would G3U00'3penetration of the Spanish Embassy in Venezuela., /svubpt' tusX\   s' L/l-Uaa &awmah 22.11.44 SOE/NEVy YORK S CX nJ Liu t ACTIVITIES OF GP. GOl and GQ3 SECTIONS  GP section   U.S.A.  1 Political warfare campaign to European African and Middle Eastern y theatres through ostensibly American shortwave broadcasts in 15 languages over most powerful American stations.  2 Political warfare within U.S.A. forming and directing interventionist societies holding meetings planting material in newspapers especially through OVERSEAS NEWS AGENCY controlled by SO distributing pamphlets  ten million copies of one pamphlet alone spreading rumours.  3 Campaign against AMERICA FIRST and other isolationist societies collection of material for U.S. newspapers to publish and U.S. government agencies to use organized opposition exposure of isolationist propaganda machine ending in prosecution of George Hill and the German agent George Sylvester Viereck.  4 Analysis of anti-British and isolationist feeling after Pearl Harbour used by President in his speech of February 1942 and by U.S. government in introducing new restrictions on anti-Roosevelt and anti- Allied propaganda leading to prosecutions for treason.  5 Guidance of the propaganda activities of COI and OSS along lines favourable to British policy throughout the world. G03 section Japan    1 Political warfare campaign to Far East through shortwave broadcasts.  2 SPINKS articles on German fifth column in Japan published through OVERSEAS NEWS AGENCY to sow distrust between Germany and Japan and to make Americans associate Japanese danger with German danger. Reprinted in Spanish Portuguese and Japanese many hundreds of thousands of copies distributed in South America Canada U.S.A. Philippines Hawaii also appearing in newspapers radio broadcasts. Smuggled into Japan with letters specially written to liberal Japanese. Congratulations from MOI discontinuance of German ambassador's newsletters to Japanese newspaper.  3 Guidance of GOI and OSS in Japanese propaganda. GOI section Latin America \    1 Three large 1941 operations discovery and exposure of BELMONTE coup to put Bolivia under Germans discovery of German map of Axis-dominated South America discovery of letter from president of LATI proving Italian   connivance in projected Integralist revolution in Brazil., 2    2 Brazil supplied police with complete dossiers on all Germans in strategic Natal area in January 1942 many arrested and Hermann Stoltz spy-ring consequently broken up. also discovered proof that the governor's newspaper was receiving subsidies from Goebbels -governor later removed.  3 Chile GllOOO and G11100 played prominent parts in inducing Chilean government to sever relations with Axis and then inspired a law to liquidate all German businesses. Many dossiers on German agents supplied to police.  4 Colombia G5500 instigated police searches of homes of many Axis agents Erich GUTER Wilhelm DITTMAR interned for possessing illicit W/T photostatic equipment and compromising documents Rudolf SCHEUPLEIN and Theodor KURCK found with undeclared bonds and money which was confiscated. Consignment of 2 000 anti-British books from Argentina destroyed. New restrictions imposed on Japanese colony. ACCION NACIONAL a totalitarian party broken up by G5500's disclosures. Law expropriating property of Axis nationals inspired by SOE now passed.    5 Costa Rica Law expropriating property of Axis nationals inspired by    6 Ecuador Three large W/T transmitters destroyed one belonging to German airline SEDTA a second belonging to Nazi leader in Riobamba and its successor in his father-in-law's house. Many Germans interned or deported after Q52nn supplied police with dossiers on them. &  7 Uruguay German societies suppressed. Radio Continental broadcasting Axis propaganda destroyed by high explosive 5.8.42.  3 Venezuela Spanish cyphers stolen from Ambassador. Shipment of Bayer drugs from Argentina turned away and destroyed. Four thousand German anti-British pamphlets seized through cutout and destroyed. Information supplied to senator who denounced Germans as fifth-columnists thereby throwing all resident Boches under suspicion leading to their internment.  9 General General building up of intelligence collaborating with and sometimes guiding SIS e.g. G01 section produced first correct appraisal of RAMIREZ revolution in Argentina. Western Hemisphere Weekly Intelligence Bulletin edited 1944-Constant exchange of information with SIS and other agencies. Support of pro-Allied minority groups in all countries. Harassing of Germans italians Japanese and Franco Spaniards e.g. by the VK game supply of counter-propaganda from censorship etc. Rumour organization., V  /  a short msma f a.o.i. acsisitiss m ms  Q.S.A. AHD IAOT AMfODA. 3 0. had its begiming in the U.S. in i eeeaber 1340 vixen Q  during a visit to Londm agreed to asaoae control of all 3.0. aativities  in -Sie Western Hamiaphere.  In Jan ary 1341 Coicnel C.G. Vidcera visited Haw York and after iscusaiono with 0 the franework c m 3.0. orgsnia&tlcm was laid out and a. diief was appointed with an assistant to serve under Mm  It was th agreed tos    1 Appoint a reprosentativo in each Latin Araerican Rejiublio with a view to establishing an 3.0. ergajdaaticcx to cover Latin Anerioa.  2 Eeosu.it in the Americas dtisens of enera&r or Gnery ocoupied countries who trould return to their countries of origin to ocmtact already' ezisting subversive elemerts and to fOxm new subversive cells.  3 fake any warrantable action likely to influence the entry of the y.S. into the war and to discredit tire enemies of the Allies in the U.3.  4 SiakQ contact with all the various groups of dissatisfied European refUEoea and free vaovoaents in tlia 0.3. A.  5 Arrange lines of oossaunLcation fma tile osteisi BsidMpbixe into anerqy and eoisqy occupied countries. &mai m u. a.  Contact was established wi.th soveral i/inority groups and tJ creation of orgnnisatians aaong tixeae was begun. The groups witlx contact was establisEiod and the activities of 3.0. in aoimectlon with thaa were briefly as fallowsi-  Austrions.  Jka orgeuxisatian known as Austria Action was formed in an atteopt to unite all antd-Hasi Austriam. In spite of differences between the various groups this project rendered picfirexerinc service insofar as it was the first minority organisation to receive benevolent recognition froaa the 0.3. DopartmarA of justice viiidi was tlien keeping a watchful eye upon all foraigi minorities in the 0.3.  Jugoslavs.  The establishment of a Slav BuUetittn created a centre for anti-iJasi activities ar.ong the orbs Croats and ElovcnGS in tlie U.3.A. Leetures were arranged ty dmaeosmtlc Slav loaders and groupc were established to watch Ifasi agents among the Croats and Slovaks.  Ukrainians.  Close contact was established with the sarin democratic group known as the Defoncc of ttie ykrEdne'1 wMch was oompcwwA of old rocosiloed leaders of the Utaainian de.xocrato social revolutionists end tlic arking Men s Groups., -2-  IteKariam.  War oteervatiosi puzpoaes mly ocaitact waa establisted with those Ki had the ssntxee into the iliaiiprism Gamamiat Porter. Contact was also established with the anti- 2asi Imaats aaong the Oorpatho luesiaK clergy.. milch was useful in oounteraotihj' the propagaada of yim-iijwiid. S.O. ran Hungarian language newspaper to  counteract pro-German feelings among this minority.  Arabs.  At the fcLiae when a British crusade to libexat Syria was considered iaainmt the principal ijaerican Arab wWBBgaper AL liOBA was persuaded to becosae entirely pro-British. A Hear East Infomation Bureau was cstabiistied in Hew York and broadcasts orer B. .L. were subsidised in all the principal Hear lastorn language .  Italians  A close co-operation was estaMiAed wife the Itesdai Society and contacts were made throu i t vn ous labour orgmioatlona with jouxiq Italian Sooialiats in an attenpt to persuade the into a nore actiw anti-Has policy.  msssuis pscFAsaisa.  .'subversive propaganda activities were directed cliiefly against enaiay agents. and two of fee raost nuccessfel results are given here.   a In March 1941 Br. Kent Rieth the Gorman diplomat feo in 1934was charged with doing Nazi propaganda work leading up to the assasninatian of DpUfuss arrived to fee 0.3. with the double nlsslon of attempting to bsy up fc 2ricanowned oil properties in Eastern Europe and contacting all 0.3. political jrovm favoirtog Isolationisra in an attempt to hinder apidacation of the I nd-Lease Bill. In May 1941 3.I.S. handed a document aa Riefe's activities to  S.O. for appropriate action A press ast.paigja was made on m extensive scale by first breakii the story as an ' exclusive8 to fee Hew 'fork Herald Tribune and then by feeding out otter mgles to ofeer newspapers and agencies.   As a result nietix was pestered by newspapers for ten days at the and of which he was taken into custody by th F.B.I. and was later expelled from fee country.    b In 1940 whilst th .3. were stall neutral fee I.G. Parteniitiustrie was a powerful and daxgeroua conaem doing ranch bans especially t3rough its oomectlOK with tte various co.apsaiss of Ptandard Oil. rhe U.3. aut ioi itiGs having rematoed uasaHVis ed of fee term beii done tbs only course toft to S.G. was to fbroo action through public opinion and conoegumtly a campaign was started in fee aiddle of Eov3 rber to fee U.3. Bras'll Colofeia Yonezuela Ecuador and Uragiey.  ate Vice-1resid 3t of Ferbetis U.3. GNanpiaay was a e aan naaod Ton Rath a naturalised Ameariom feo had worked as a Gejnaan agent in ths   U.S.A. to the-last war vten te was a Oomaercial Counsellor at tte Certaaa Kmbassy to fashfegtoa. In 1940 as an American oltisesa a wealthy man and a mesfeer ext' all tte best clubs in How York te was possibly tte guiding bi ain behind fee activities of Farben to tte U. Two weoks of pressure propaganda in which his nasa and activities were publicised consMoraMy brought about liis resignation from fee Company to Becoaber.   The oaiapaiui was contirEsed for some weeks and eventually resulted, 3   in the Farben interests in the U.3. being taken over by nominees of the U.S. authorities.  FAR SA3g.  In the first six acaiths of its existence tee 3 0. organisation in tee U. 3. enquired an additional function in fulfilling the i-ecjiireiaaits of tea Sbr astern Branoh of 3.0. E. at Sin -apo.re.  ublicatrion was arranged in tee U.3. press of suitable news stories articles and cartoons and items by radio coGBoentaiars. Broadcasts both for internal and foreign eonsuEr tion were organised. A special daily news service to and from Singapore was set up. Leaflets and. paoiiiilots were printed and distributed in Japanese among the Japanese communities in tee 0.3. The same operations were repeated in South America.  The foUcwing is one of the principal operations conducted by tee Far Eastern j.ection -  A reliable and discreet American Journalist was contacted on his arrival from Japan. His knowledge and experience afforded him the necessary reputation as an authority on Japanese affairs  A report compiled some time previously from official scurces in Japan Yiiioh gave a suarmiy of German subversive activities in that country was traced and tee material contained therein edited and written up in tee fbna of sc article acceptable to a leading Hew York newspaper under the signature of the American Journalist referred to.  Re-publication rights abroad wore secured end it was arranged for a news agency to telegraph the article verbatim to Loixkm. 3 0.E. London were advised publication date in advance and made tee necessary arrangements fbr world vd.de radio and press publicity.  On publication in tee U. .A. the material oontained was quoted extensively in a series of broadcasts to tee Far end widely used by local radio ccamaaitators.  FOR-iATEOl'i Off O.o.o.  In July 1941 Oolonel Donovan teo had been for many months in dose touch with G received a directive from tlie President to set up an crgariisatitm to deal with all forms of secret activities. Lines of liaison and co-operation between 3.0. and tee new American organisation known as O.3.S. were decided upon and carried into effect.  In order to assist in tee estahLisiiaent of Colonel onovan s organisation special oo'urses were drawn up and carried out at the 3.0. Training school in Ciunada.  3.0. TSAIHIHG 3Q10QL B CAiliDA. TMa scJiool was opened by 3.0. in Deoaaber 1941 bxtI has since trained personnel of G-'s Head Office and all the chief agents in Latin Taerica in addition to key officials of Colonel Donovan s organisation and the F.B.I.  Courses at tee school consisted of training in Intelligmoe creation of an S.O.E. organisation unairaed combat small arae daaolitions mxL incsendiariam and wireless telegraphy.  The school gave S.O. training courses to Canadian Jugoslavs Italians Hungarians Roumanians Bulgarians etc. who were recruited by S.O. in Canada the majority of whom were eventually infiltrated into Europe., -4   umi AJiBPXA  As already stated9 in January 1941 it was decided to appoint an 3.0. ropresentatirc in each of the countrf.es of Latin \rserica wife a view to estahHahing separate organisations gotoline i&e rfiole of tto oontinent eadh of which would he responrf.hl thr f i its cxiief agarit to G.  iy June 1941 S.O. representatives fbr seven Latin cerican countries ted visited liew York and ted had tiirfr appciixtsHBots oonfirraod Preliiainary arrangorerts had also hem s&d ibr representation in the reraaixdng coiaafcrics. Up to tl3D entry into the war of the U.3. A. . S.O.S. operations in Latin /aaeiica were sanMdbftt liiaitod in scope hut a great deal of pxelimimjy weak ted ham cc Lsted in tte fora of tte ool3.oction of Intelli pnoeA campaignwas siicce'our s es. 219 suh-agents in addition to numerous contacts. Each area was orgarioed on stmdard linos with a chief agent xiho was in direct contact with tJie local British Embassy or Legation.  3.0. Mmm in itsm nmnoA. The following esaiplcs illustrate tl auocoaoful results achievcxl ly S.O.E. through indirect notbocla -  BGLIVIA.   Tte P. 0. PL reprasmtativn in Bolivia ty intercepting a docmasEt in the possession of Major Belmcaite Bolirfon Siilitaiy Atfeol in I3erlin was able to fiunisli Uj Bolivian Govern.btxL with details of a projectod revolt.  T hia action besides strmgttentng the positian of the anti Axis Bolivian Govemoe then in parer led to the adoption of numDrouis security measuros and encairagod a wav of anti-ifazi feeling extending to the U.S.A.  BBAZIL.   a The 3.G.E. r a'eaentative in Rio obtained possession of a letter written by the .'rcslilait of the M5JI Air Liao Oomxmy in Focn to a oorresponiigat in Rio vliioh contained insulting references to Brasilians in gaaeral and to President Vargas In particular. President Vargas who hitherto was roluot-nt to take any ineamreo agahast tJiis Italian air line on being shown the letter revoked the LAST ocnomoicai in Brazil.   h ihe amast and incarceration of asqy Gorfaa in North Brazil which led to the break up of the Stolts espionage group can be attributed to a representative of 3.O.E. who suSndttod detailed dossiers to tixj police. The 3.0.15. id f agrait in oollaboratian with the police obtained the arrest end deportation of many Gmxmm ami the dectxwtion of the rising Fascist Party.  clTTLE  Tte aO.E. agent tsaed pocraonal influcsice on Cabinet Ministers and left wing leaders tshich together wi th the report of a Gidlean Investigating Ccraraittee partly written by our chief agent's assistant led towards the rupture of relations with the Axis., -5  KgjiiKtm  The chief agent of 3.O.E. 'bee tl unofficial head of all airfci-rAxis. aganoies Hscovssred proof of pso-GeaMKi acU.vity tr tiie 1 resident b brother-in-lsor submitted tlie naiaes of mmy dangerous Gersttws for depertatian m l obtained the establislitaent of a ecmomtration. oaop for the reiasinaer.  Ammum.  In October 1941 President Roosevelt in a broadcast declared he had in Ms possess on a map of outh merica drawn up in Berlin.  1 c described hem feis aap shower to lyvogOBod partitiming cf South America in accordance with -die Hew World Order of to Axis. TMs revelation played an important part in convircing to people of to  U.3.A. that Hitler had deai as on to western Iford-spiiere just as far reaching as he had on to old wcrM. This mag was obtatod txom to Qesssan asbassy in Buenos Aires by the S.O.E. rwresentattve in tint city.  Our chief age obtained to expulsion or black-listing of several isportanfc Germans aid. Genaan fJjnaB.  CIMTMh AMBSICA.   Two of our chief agents in this area helped push an expropriation law throu i the Costa Rican Oongreas wldch resulted in the elirflinatLon of all ftenmn oaaraeroe. They also carried out an aerial survey of Central America and prepared a long list of targets for S.G. operations.  mtUGUAZ.  In 1%2 our ageait Mtii to assistance of a few friends oompletely deatreyed the Radio Continental in Montevideo a powerful station which broadcast violent Axis propaganda to Unigusy ArgenUna Soutom Brasil and other nMgJfiiouring countries  Tills station was on the British aisl U. St Mack lists but was subsidised by -to Genann Industrie tSFd. m in Argentina.  The police were unahLe to find any due to the persons who carried out the operation. As the prospective father-ir.-lE' of the Aecretaiy of ' Radio Oontinantal had access to esplosivea the police believed that the Secretaiy himself might be respcaasible. His hmse was searched several tames md he was subjected to grave suspicion  The Insurance Goaxary windi was of German origin refused to pay to policy.   nauaTEiAL asoiKm soihmb.  During the year 1942 the establishment of an Industrial Security Executive was set up tie object of which was to ensure tlie protection in all Latin African cxmntxies of axitish imlustrial undertaking and of strategic raateri Is ant.1 ooiaaunicationa in ticral. The training of the officers for this brandi of G s organisation yiob carried out at to special 3.0. Training School in Toronto Canada   At the end of 1942 it was decided to reduce the ..0.15. organisation in south Aaocica the Rio Confera ice hwirc achieved many of to purposes for which 3.0.73. had bean warMag.,    V  6 Aaaar&iB&ly the Porei i Offioe waa infonaed that 3.O.E. had deof-Oed to redice their orsazdsaticai in Sou'ta iiaarica rotainlng only a rainisiaua of rajsresentatiTQS to mahte aotiirjiiaB to be reauaBd in the event of meacpacted future daveXopE ntM mteisg a remagtioa neoesoaiy or flaairable.  S.O.E. in -xniih t3rioa wsrkea until Its dlooiac on October 1st 1%4 tirQly under oovor and it is yaetioally oerfedn that .none of the U.3 secret agencies in Sooth .jaerica had any knowlodgs of the esAstano of 3.0 F 's r srosenfcatives or of thedr sctirities. t, ARCHIVES   FILE NUMBER SOE HISTORY 47 AMERICA'S PROPAGANDA ACTIVITIES VOLUME Appendices of unidentified Report FROM 1941 TO 1942, AP P EM DICES   The attached appendices illustrate in detail the sectionalized reports on Political Warfare.  Sections GP and GQ3, APPENDIX A   POLITICAL WARFARE OPERATIONS IN THE AMERICAS   The aims of SOE New York on behalf of PWE are as follows   I. To liaise with which guide all U.S. agencies which carry out propaganda and political warfare abroad. II. To carry out operations ollate III. To collect and c  enemy-occupied territories.   1 a . The Foreign Information Services   The structure of this organisation is described separately and from the details contained in Appendix B it will be seen that their operations up to the present have been largely overt but they are now planning 'black' operations on an increasing scale. These will include whispering campaigns 'black publications for secret distribution subsidies to papers and magazines in neutral countries Spain Sweden Turkey etc. .   Over a period of twelve months SOE/New York have developed close and intimate relations with FIS in all its branches. At the beginning of May SOE was asked by FIS to assist in the distribution of a pamphlet illustrating the Nazi persecution of the Roman Catholic Church. The pamphlet was intended for distribution in Portugal Spain and France but SOE were asked not only to arrange distribution but also to smuggle this material into these countries from the TJ.S. and from Latin America.   As this was the first case of its kind a test shipment of propaganda devices match folders blotters paper cups etc. was first despatched to the Iberian Peninsula and the larger project will be planned on the experience gained from this experiment.   It is clear however that FIS will rely very considerably upon the resources of SOE for 'black operations. See Appendix C. I b . Coordinator of Information   Colonel Donovan's SO organisation is now being built up in the field where in addition to 'physical' SO operations they will devote a large measure of their, -2   time to 'black propaganda. Head liaison officer with W45 for example will   be appointed by Colonel Donovan's SO while the proposed FIS representative will   be confined to overt radio and publications operations.    Consequently a constant liaison with the COI will be necessary to ensure that 'black propaganda operations in the field are coordinated have the same aim and are not duplicated by one side or the other.   Liaison will also be necessary on the nature and amount of propaganda material required by the field stations newsprint radio and radiophoto apparatus leaflets magazines news stories rumours and rumour-directives devices etc.   Up to the present the only British mission in touch with Colonel Donovan's SO is SOE. A detailed review of these relations is appended elsewhere in G's report to SOE but it will be seen that no other mission is in a position to fulfil this function. 1 c . Psychological Warfare Branch   PWB is a branch of the U.S. War Department and functions as a part of Military Intelligence under the U.S. Chiefs of Staff to whom its executive chief Colonel O.N.Solbert is directly responsible.   Its work is based on the assumption which is held by many influential Americans War Department officials and civilian students of psychological warfare alike that PW is an integral part of the Armed Service if not a new Service in itselfj and that therefore psychological warfare must be based on the plans of the Chiefs of Staff.   For example. If it is the intention of the Allies to send an expeditionary force against French West Africa it must be the task of Psychological Warfare to soften up the ground in advance by an intensive campaign of both 'white' and 'black propaganda to confuse the enemy and victim by the same means to assist the campaign when it is launched by using Propaganda Units with the task forces engaged and finally to consolidate the ground gained by placing these Propaganda Units in charge of all forms of public information in the territory occupied.   The above is a very broad example but it will be seen that the U.S. army authorities have been greatly impressed by the German methods of total warfare and are seeking to emulate them., -3 -  SOE has been in touch with PWB for the last three or four months and has succeeded in influencing them on certain lines of policy and methods of operation. This has not always been easy due undoubtedly to the fact that the military mind is first predominant in PWB and second while recognising the importance of psychological warfare does not readily grasp the subtleties of its operations.   However the growing power of the Services in this weapon of warfare is a fact which must be realised. Furthermore such American generals as MacArthur and Brereton have been vested with a large degree of autonomy and any attempt to carry out psychological warfare work in their territories must be done with their knowledge and approval.   Thus PWB possesses a power which neither of the two other agencies can claim at the present and this power can be expected to increase rather than otherwise.    An advantage may be the expected absorption by COI of PWB but since this has not yet taken place the report has dbalt with the two agencies separately. PWB proposes to carry out both defensive and offensive psychological war fare in both the domestic and foreign fields.   As an example of defensive p.w. work in the domestic field may be quoted the proposals which PWB has drawn up for cushioning to the U.S. public possible future reverses on the Russian front.   An example of defensive operations in the foreign field is the attempt to prevent further Japanese atrocities by publicising in the domestic press and shortwave radio those of which evidence is available. This course of action as against a policy of complete silence was adopted by PWB on SOS's advice.   In the offensive field of operations PWB is still in a stage of preparation rather than operation. However Colonel Solbert has stated that in general he proposes to leave black operations in all areas other than the Far East entirely to SOE. It may be assumed that at this stage this is too sweeping a statement and that as he develops his organisation and as his officers graduate from SOE's training school in Canada he will at least wish to attach liaison officers with SOE missions in the field., -4-   A proposal which deserves the elosest attention concerns the creation of Propaganda Units to serve with U.S. task forces. The draft plan of organisation of these Units has not yet been completed but their proposed functions range from such overt affairs as the control of all radio broadcasting in territories occupied by these Task Forces to pure SO work inside enemy territory.   The present relations between SOE and FWB can be developed by FWE as required.   II. To carry out Operations in Latin America on behalf of PIE One of the objects of SOE should be the use of Latin America as a means of penetrating Europe. There are large and well-organised German minorities in almost every Latin American country. The Italian minorities in Brazil and the Argentine are also extensive but much more assimilated. The Japanese minorities in Brazil and Peru are not only large but entirely unassimilated and in continuous close touch with Japan due to the freedom with which they have been allowed to organise themselves.   There are various methods of using Latin America as a springboard    i Rumours. In each country covering the waterfronts if the country has a seaboard newspaper circles the stock exchange the markets neutral and enemy missions.  ii &etter-writing. This should operation with FIS according to the target and the effect desired.  iii Radio. There are in Latin shortwave facilities which can be heard in Europe and in the Far East. A list of these stations was obtained from London some time ago. Attempts should be made through secret subsidies to obtain control over these stations for the purpose of using their shortwave facilities of which no use is being made at present. Broadcasts would be in the form of pressure propaganda since their British origin would never appear.  iv Smuggling of pamphlets field which offers many opportunities. The Basque skippers of Spanish ships which ply betwesithe Argentine Brazil and Spain provide a means which may, -5   readily be brought to use. It Is also believed that the Basques have their own smuggling organisation with lines across the Iberian Peninsula into France. Similarly use should be made of Portuguese shipping between Brazil the Azores and Portugal.   At this stage shipping between Japan and the West Coast of South America is almost at a standstill but information from confidential sources indicates that Japan will make every effort to revive this trade. In that event every attempt should be made to utilise these facilities also.   III. To collect and collate information for FWE This subject has been reviewed elsewhere in Appendix E. Broadly speaking it involves the interrogation of people arriving from Europe an examination of information from SIS and other secret sources such as the Censorship stations and extracts from newspaper articles which are not received by the British press.   This is a routine but important function which requires careful organisation and speedy but safe methods of communication to enable information to be passed to PWE in time to be useful and yet without risk of the enemy discovering its   source, APPENDIX B   FOREIGN INFORMATION SERVICES   The Foreign Information Service of the Coordinator of Information is   concerned primarily with the overt dissemination of propaganda and information everywhere in the world excepting the Western Hemisphere. It will however be in a position to undertake increasing covert or subversive activity as time goes on.   Robert E. Sherwood the celebrated playwright is head of the Foreign Information Service and under him are four main divisions   I. The Planning Board. II. Radio News and Features. III. Pictures and Publications. IV. Outposts.  The GP Section maintains close and intimate contact with each of these sections but particularly with the Radio News and Features section and the division of Pictures and Publications.   I. The Planning Board In addition to Mr. Sherwood the FIS Planning Board now consists of five members -E.L. Taylor J.P. Warburg W.R. Deuel P. Winner and H. Guinzberg. Meetings are held on Tuesdays Wednesdays and Thursdays of each week in Washington and are generally attended by at least one representative from the State Department and one officer from Colonel Donovan's SOS organisations.   Although it would be too flattering to state that the Planning Board enjoys the full confidence either of the State Department on policy or of the SOS on secret intelligence material FIS have nevertheless been enabled to work    I because lines of policy were broad and elastic  II because the Voice of America over the radio had an appeal in itself and did not need the added stimulus of hot news . On many occasions also SOE was able to supply FIS with background material obtained from secret sources e.g. on Pierre Laval. Furthermore it occurred in practice that the bulk of the day-to-day work fell upon the writers and translators of the Radio News and Features Division many of whom were themselves natives of the countries at which their propaganda was   aimed these men were able to bring to the programmes a native atmosphere which   more than made up for lack of that information which FIS were unable to obtain from   other government agencies., -2-   II. Radio. Nev/s and Features '1'he use of radio news and features is under the direction of Joseph Barnes. For months after its inception his section was gravely handicapped by internal difficulties of organization and by conflicts with the privately-owned radio industry which had a virtually complete monopoly of the shortwave broadcasting field. Both these problems have gradually been resolved to the point where by July 1 1942 the Coordinator of Information will have a compact politically pliable set-up which will be carrying on an intensive aggressive propaganda campaign in most of the world.   Two changes have made possible the transformation of this division from a complicated relatively ineffective organization into one which will play an increas ingly important role in political warfare responding promptly to military and political developments and exploiting situations with maximum speed and determination.   The first of these changes is the acquisition of direct control over actual broadcasting facilities. As of June 8 1942 broadcasts programmed by the Foreign Information Service total 455 hours a week. This total does not include many other broadcasts over which it exercises some measure of control. Thirteen hours of each day are covered by FIS-controiled broadcasts and within a short time FIS will have all 24 hours of the day at its disposal.   There are 15 shortwave transmitters in the United States. The programs of seven of these have been brought Tinder direct ahd complete FIS control while a sufficient proportion of the programs of the other eight is directed by FIS for it to claim 70 to 80 per cent of the total kilowatt power devoted to shortwave broad casting.   The seven transmitters under the aegis of FIS are   1. WLWO Cinncinnati. This 75 kw. transmitter is the world s strongest. 2. WCW Hicksville Long Island. Owned by Press Wireless. 3. WBOS Boston. Owned by Westinghouse. 4 WDO Mew York. Owned by American Telephone and Telegraph Co. 5. KWID San Francisco. 6. WJQ Hicksville L.I. This is beamed to Australia and the south Pacific 7. WCB Hicksville. Beamed on Africa., -3 -   The other stations are   KGEI San Francisco and WGEA-O Schenectady N.Y. both owned by General Electric WCBX and WCRC New Yor]f of the Columbia Broadcasting System .TOGA and WNBI New York of the National Broadcasting Company and WRUL Boston of the World Wide Broadcasting Foundation.   Of these the two General Electric outlets will soon come under full FIS control which will leave only the CBS and NBC stations and WRUL outside the official fold.   Although FIS controls the bulk of the power harnessed to shortwave broad casting it still must overcome the problem of building up a regular listening audience. Mr. Barnes estimates that it can only count on 20 per cent of the established listening audience so far.   The second change and it is of equal or greater importance is the sectionalization of the Radio News and Features Division of FIS. At its start it was organized in pyramid form with plans and directives originating at the top and filtering slowly down to other sections of the organization. It has now been stream lined on the basis of country sections each staffed with experts in the particular field they must cover and each prepared to exploit to the limit every phase of radio propaganda. They will see that the American radio is a forceful political weapon not merely an information service. While the campaign of each will be integrated into a broad general pattern the sections will be able to tackle each country as a separate and distinct problem and thus to exert the greatest possible influence on its thought and actions.   Seven major sections have been set up with their heads they are   1 French  Edmond Taylor.   2. Italian Percy Winner. 3. German  J.P. Warburg. 4. EnglishEd. Johnson. 5 Balkan and Near East --Brackett Lewis. 6. ScandinavianGunnar Fagrell. 7. Iberian Peninsula  R. Rendueles.  This does not include the Far Eastern section whose headquarters are in the West Coast and which will soon be re-organized., -4-   Programs are going out in more than 25 languages and more are to be added. The following are now in use   English Spanish French German Italian Japanese Spanish Portuguese Chinese Dutch Danish Norwegian Swedish Finnish Polish Greek Albanian Serbo- Croat Afrikaans Arabic Turkish Malayan Tagalog Thai and Hindustani. Berber and Icelandic will soon be added with others to come later.   Working closely with the radio sections is the Cable-Wireless News Section which is headed by Edward W. Barrett a former editor of Newsweek magazine. This branch sends thousands of words daily to the FIS men stationed in more than 30 out posts throughout the world. The outpost men circulate this news to newspapers and radio stations in their territory. They are also 'leg-men1 supplying information for the Washington and New York news desks of FIS.   The Propaganda Analysis Section is also a vital cog in Mr. Barnes' division. It analyzes all shortviave broadcasts. It works very rapidly and by seeking out the weaknesses in the enemy's radio offensive enables the American radio to exploit them while they are still hot.   Liaison Between SOE and FIS   Before the United 'States entered the war GP section of SOE supplied FIS with a large quantity of material much of which it is still making available to FIS. Two services which were discontinued were the passing to FIS of PWE directives and guidances ahd a special summary of BBC monitoring of European medium-wave broadcasts.   The directives ahd guidances had been cabled in cipher weekly. They were rewritten for cable security reasons and to conceal their British origin and sent to Barnes who of course knew what they were. The monitoring summary was received en clair by wireless each day extended by GP and sent to FIS. The former was dis continued by PWE who at that time preferred to hand them directly to FIS representa tives at London the latter because FIS set up its own organization in London to handle it.   Abandonment of these two services did not bring about a decrease in cooper ation with FIS however. Large quantities of material continued to flow in each direction, -5- To FIS the following was and is sent regularly   1. A daily news guidance. 2. Confidential weekly guidances summarizing the background of the news and recommending the best line to follow. 3. British home intelligence reports. 4. BBC monitoring reports. 5. BBC daily digests of world broadcasts. 6. News Digests. 7. Turkish Persian and Arabic news bulletins. 8. PWE weekly directive for all countries which is received by SOE bag. 9. Special reports of the PWE research section such as a. Axis Broadcasts and the Strategic Intentions of the Axis. b. Axis broadcasts a Year Ago and Two Years Ago Today. c. The Propaganda Man. 10. Miscellaneous information and suggestions. special censorship intercepts ideas for broadcasts etc. From FIS GP receives   1. Federal Communications Commission transcripts of shortwave broadcasts daily digest weekly analyses and special reports. 2. All reports of the Propaganda Analysis Section of FIS including daily summaries and analyses of Axis medium-wave broadcasts and selected quotations a Special Daily Propaganda Analysis a study called  Axis Handling of News and Claims Axis Broadcasts to Latin America and other up-to-the-minute reports.   3. Special recordings when requested. 4. Other special information and reports as desired. In both directl ons the exchange outlined above is carried out with the utmost cooperation and goodwill all officers of the GP section are personally on good terms with the FIS officers with whom they deal and there are virtually no limits to what GP may request from FIS or vice versa.   To simplify the despatch of material to FIS GP has established an arrange ment with Wallace Deuel of the FIS Planning Board. Everything which GP wishes to a e-e.5 send to Mr. Deuel who routes it to whichever FIS section is concerned with a minimum of delay.   GP s liaison with FIS is almost entirely based on PWE operations and interests. The material of British origin which GP passes to FIS apart from whatever value it may have for FIS helps to promote coordination of British and American radio propaganda. Similarly the FIS material which GP receives benefits PWE. A considerable, -6   part of the material which comes to GP from FIS is sent to London for PWE notably the FCC analyses of shortwave broadcasts and FCC special reports. On several occasions GP has obtained recordings from FIS for PWE sometimes at the request of PWE sometimes on its own initiative. Although all the FIS material is not sent to London it is all examined by SOS and any parts which appear to have value for PWE are sent on., -7-   III. PICTURES MI PUBLICATIONS The Publications Division of the United States Coordinator of Information Office is headed by Edward Stanley -224 West 57th Street New York. Mr. Stanley a man of about 42 years of age served with the Associated Press as foreign news editor and has also had considerable experience abroad. Prior to joining the Coordinator of Information he played a prominent part in the founding of the newspaper P.M. a New York publication which carries no advertising and might be termed an experiment in journalism. He is not a man given to snap decisions but prefers to weigh each problem carefully and is in the habit of consulting fully with his subordinates before arriving at any decision. He has a capacity for viewing situations which arise within his own office in the relation to the broad picture a keen understanding of the problems of the members of his staff and inordinate ability to obtain cooperation. BUDGET   Owing to the present undecided future of the Publications Section as between the FIS and Colonel Donovan's SO it is impossible to give any accurate idea of the amount of money which is at the disposal of this section although it is very considerable. At least two projects  one concerning books and the other magazines  are budgeted for about one million dollars each. Finance procedure is for this section to present its proposals to the Coordinator who in turn passes it on to the Coordinator's Finance Committee and from there to the U.S. Treasury. Although in theory this is a somewhat lengthy process it is actually speedy in practice and Mr. Stanley's office is never at any time short of funds to carry out whatever projects may be planned. PERSONNEL   From a comparatively small staff of about 10 people in November 1941j Mr. Stanley's organisation has now expanded to nearly 200. Staff meetings which G6ll attends are held every Saturday morning and approximately 25 section   chiefs are present. At this meeting all section chiefs present their individual problems and while quite naturally the majority of those present are not experts in all phases of the work they give to the full all their ability in solving each problem. This results in a great esprit de corps as no decisions, -8   of any major importance are made by Mr. Stanley until he has fully consulted   his section heads.   Within his organisation he has experts on the various countries to which his propaganda is directed. These individuals are not only experts on languages but also on conditions in the various countries and each is consulted by the various project chiefs. For instance many projects which Mr. Stanley has under way at the moment are letter writing propaganda devices books magazines and booklets. Experts on Germany France Spain etc. are consulted with the individual handling of each of these projects before a start is made.   In almost every case SOE has been consulted before the project has been approved. In this way SOE is fully informed on Mr. Stanley s plans.   A letter writing campaign is to commence shortly the groundwork has been laid in full liaison with SOE. A Mr. Donald Chrisman is charged with the res ponsibility of handling this campaign. Mr. Chrisman is an expert on direct mail advertising and has drawn up the plan of campaign in cooperation with experts on various countries.   It is planned that this campaign will be directed principally at Japan Germany and Italy. He has a number of plans in discussion. One includes the holding of mail going out of this country to Axis countries removing the letter and putting a forged one in its place. Another is to secure letter paper and envelopes with European watermarks and while these letters would be written in the U.S. they would be taken to neutral countries by messenger and mailed from there. Another suggestion is the use of individuals who have been acting as intermediaries for private and commercial correspondence between Europe and the Americas. SOE has a list of several hundred intermediaries which it is proposed to use for this project.   The possibility of forging German newspapers is also under the jurisdiction   of Mr. Chrisman.   It should thus be noted that although overt in its main forms this   section of FIS is now launching into 'black activities for whose prosecution   it relies greatly on the advice and assistance of SOE., -9-   DEVICES   After a serious study of conditions within Occupied and Axis countries a section was set up in Mr. Stanley's office for the production of 'gadgets' based on shortages of various products and materials blotters soap sugar pincushions paper cups matchs and toy aeroplanes. All of these will be of obvious American origin and will carry a brief propaganda message.   The blotters will carry pictures of aeroplane production or of the factory showing tanks being made.   Lumps of sugar will be wrapped with paper on which will be printed a brief message and in some cases it is planned to put out small cellophane envelopes containing sugar and a message.   In cooperation with the soap manufacturers of this country it is now possible to produce soap in extremely thin sheafs. Each small sheaf which will be enclosed in an envelope and will contain the message Wipe your hands of the dictators or some other similar or pointed text.   The pincushion contains an invitation to stick pins into caricatures of Mussolini and Hitler. Paper cups have been designed in collapsible form each with a printed message.   Match folders bear various propaganda slogans.   The production of toy aeroplanes is a plan based on the known shortage   of toys for children in Axis and Axis-controlled countries. These would be of   cardboard folded flat., -10 -   BOOKLETS   Mr. Stanley's office has now reached a quota of almost one booklet per week. The booklets cover the entire propaganda field and are excellent pro ductions in this field. POSTERS   Range from modernistic art to ordinary simple posters in a large number of languages. LEiJLETb   Leaflets dropped by the R.A.F. over Europe are prepared by Mr. Stanley's section. SECURITY   As SOE frequently provides Mr. Stanley's Section with confidential reports and as he is also in receipt of similar reports from his own Govern ment he has established a secret division in his organization which is cons tantly under guard and which operates tinder satisfactory security conditions. Officers wishing to read these reports must go to this room for that purpose and under no circumstances are these reports allowed to be removed. RADI0F0T0   With a number of stations already in operation it is the intention of the Radiofoto Section of the Publication Division to put into operation fifty stations throughout the world by the end of the year. These Radiofoto stations will be in direct communication with New York for the transmission and recep tion of pictures intended not only for leaflets but for publications of a more general distribution. MICROFILM   Mr. Stanley's office have cooperated with SOE in regard to the micro   filming Of reports from London for FIS. A large number of reports which come to this office from London and from other sources are made available to Mr. Stanley's office. Due to the time lag caused by slow convoys many of these reports are reaching this office weeks after they have been produced. In an effort to cut down this time gap Mr. Stanley's office has agreed to pro vide the facilities for the printing of microfilm. The matter was taken up with London and request made that certain types of reports be put on microfilm, -11   and sent out to this country by air. The film will be developed and handed to Mr. Deuel for dissemination to the country sections. PRO-CATHOLIC PROPAGANDA   One of the major projects at present under way in the office of Mr. Stanley is a book entitled THE NAZI WAR AGAINST CATHOLIC CHURCH. This book has been prepared to look like a bible and will be printed on onion skin paper. It presents the case against Hitler and his anti-church activities. This will be printed in a number of languages and will be primarily intended for mem bers of the clergy.   IV OUTPOSTS   The Outposts division of FIS is one of its most important. It is headed by Harold Guinzberg. So far the 30-odd men it has in the field through out the world are working in the open chiefly as press attaches or simply as agents of the Coordinator of Information. But they may well also be the nuc leus of subversive organizations in the field or at least serve to screen the presence of SO agents depending on the final directive which FIS receives from the President.   The Outposts men exploit the news sent out by the Cable-Wireless News   Section. Many new men are to be added until its staff numbers 700 to 800.   Some of the places where they are already stationed are London Berne Madrid   Cairo Brazzaville Capetown New Delhi Chungking Istanbul Ankara and   Iceland., LIST OF OUTPOSTS   ANKARA   BERNE   BRAZZAVILLE   CAIRO   CAPETOWN CHUNGKING   ISTANBUL   JOHANNESBURG   LONDON   NEW DELHI   REYKJAVIK   STOCKHOLM   Robert Parker Jr. c/o American Embassy  see also Istanbul   Gerald Mayer c/o American Legation   George Bookman c/o American Consulate   George B.Roberts Herbert C.Black H.R.Cooley   Paul West c/o American Legation   Theodore Horde  same   Elmer Lower Jayo Williamson Chas. H.Pope    See Johannesburg   F.M.Fisher c/o American Embassy  Cable Address AMERINFO   Alghan R.Lusey Neil D.Brown Clarence S.Topp   Robert Parker Jr. c/o American Consulate  Cable Address COINFO   Hiram Blauvelt c/o American Consulate   Cooninator of Information c/o American Embassy  Cable Address COINFORM   Irving Pflaum Harry Lerner   Morris Gilbert Theodore Olson   Robert Aura Smith c/o American Legation  Address for press cables   c/o Grand Hotel Delhi   Porter McKeever c/o American Legation   Karl Jensen c/o American Legation  Cable Address AMPRESS   Sr. FIS Representative   Sr. FIS Representative   Sr. FIS Representative   Reproduction Editor Radio Operator Relief Operator and   Radiophoto man   St. FIS Representa.tive   Asst. FIS Representative   Radiophoto Editor Reproduction Editor Radio Engineer-Facsimile   Sr. FIS Representative   Radio Communications Officer iin it   Radiophoto Editor.   Sr. FIS Representative   Sr. FIS Representative   Radio & News Representative Assistant FIS man for analysis   of Axis broadcasts News Editor for FIS Asst. News Editor for FIS   Sr. FIS Representative   Sr. FIS Represents.tive   Representing Publications Division FIS pending assignment of a Sr. FIS Representative, COORDINATOR OF INFORMATION  FOREIGN INFORMATION SERVICE   English French Italian German Iberian Soand-tnaC B Eastern Europe Ed. Johnson E.L. Taylor P. Winner J. Warburg R. Rendueles G. Fagrell Brackett Lewis   I. Organization of Personnel, COORDINATOR OF INFORMATION  FOREIGN INFORMATION SERVICE   II Operational Plan Radio. Hews and Features, APPENDIX C   SECRET January 22 1942.  TO WHITNEX FROM SHERWOOD SUBJECT Points of Liaison   The Foreign Information Service operates throughout the world outside of the continental United States and Latin America.   The FIS now has only two outpost bases in London and Chungking. A few individual representatives are in the field or en route. Further bases are being developed as rapidly as possible.   Propaganda operations by the FIS are both overt and subversive. The latter is so far negligible but will be developed as experience and foreign representation increase.   The FIS has already enjoyed and wishes to continue to enjoy liaison and even collaboration with PWE particularly in planning. FWE directives are most valuable. Coordination of policy will become of ever greater importance with the extension of joint operations in various theatres of war.   FIS wishes to keep at least one of its best men in England at all times to work closely with PWE and FIS believes it would be most helpful if a repre sentative of PWE could be assigned to work with the planning board in Washington.   So far FIS contacts with MOI have been largely limited to London. But it is obvious that in many parts of the world especially the Far East FIS representatives should work in conjunction with MOI representatives.   In the past relations between FIS and MOI in the United States have been difficult because FIS could not properly be identified with British representa tives whose main purpose was presentation of the British case to the American   people.   In the United States and in Britain FIS has been in close and constant   contact with SOE which has been of inestimable aid in developing operations.   It is important to remember that FIS is a new and relatively inexperienced   organisation. It wishes to have the collaboration of our British friends in   planning and in operations and it needs the benefit of their advice and counsel., -2-   Since FIS combines much of the work done by all three British agencies mentioned above  MOI FWE and SOE  it is my hope that methods may be worked out whereby we may have collaboration based on direct contacts with all of them., APPENDIX D   SOUTH AMERICA   To South America in each semi-monthly bag go   GOSSIP PARAGRAPHS. These are compiled from information received from intercepts. Rumour Guidances etc. and are kept to about 50 words each. They are designed to be the subject of discussion by various agents in the field.   PARAGRAPHS ON CONDITIONS IN EUROPE. These are taken from stories appearing either in the Axis press press of Axis occupied countries or neutral press. By using their origin they are meant to give an appearance of corroboration to rumours and whispers which may not be so well-founded on fact.   PROPAGANDA STORIES. These are created from Rumour Guidances inter   cepts etc. and are written at some length. They are designed for publication   in the press of Latin America.   RUMOUR GUIDANCES. These are taken from Rumour Directives cabled from London. CONFIDENTIAL GUIDANCES. These are prepared from background material and are intended for the guidance of agents in the field.   All of the foregoing except for the Confidential Guidances are de signed primarily to be put back into Enemy or Enemy Occupied countries. Re ports are regularly received from officers in the field dealing with the action taken.   GP has carried on a study of the press of Latin America collecting and classifying information and paying particular attention to Axis and Falangist penetration and activity. This gives a comprehensive picture if and when it is needed either for operations in Latin America or in using Latin America as a springboard for Europe.   Some nine months ago SOE commenced a close study of all correspon   dence to and from Latin America with a view to ascertaining whether any channels   could be used as grape-vines into Europe. This study has been kept up although   no use has been made of it up to the present. It is however available for use whenever it is agreed that a campaign shall start., APPENDIX E.   MISCELLANEOUS ACTIVITIES FOR P.W..E.   Copies of the Coordinator of Information Broadcast Schedules are sent to London in each bag. The latest copy goes by air bag and the others by sea bag as per instructions from London.   Newspaper Clippings which show conditions in Europe and about which London may not be advised are sent to them in each bag. Reports compiled by Col. Donovan's Research Analysis are obtained via SIS and sent to London with whatever comment is felt necessary.   With regard to Intercepts these are read carefully for trends and for information which could be used in London. While the number of intercepts read by this section has decreased since the United States entered the war their importance has grown with the result that considerable amount of time is necessary to study them.   Passengers arriving in this country axe questioned by Interrogation officers of the United states authorities and obtained by SOE from SIS. These   reports are sent to London as quickly as possible where necessary cables are   sent giving a brief summary of the contents of the reports. Similar action is   taken in the matter of Trinidad and Bermuda Censorship reports.   Letters to be sent to France for P.W.E. have been the subject of numer ous discussions with Mr Stanley director of FIS publications Section. It is planned to have these mailed from various points in the United States.   In future it will be possible to have these letters written in the U.S. At the request of SOE Mr. Stanley arranged with Admiral Leahy Ambassador to Vichy from the United States to bring back with him a copy of Bottin. This has been done and as a result SOE has been enabled to carry out the extended letter-writing campaign for P.W.E., APPENDIX F   FAR EAST   In the following appendices reference is made to Q and G 50 000. It should be noted that these are the SOE security symbols for the Foreign Information Services.,  i ' APPEND IX I   S.O. JAPANESE PROPAGANDA ON THE AMERICAN CONTINENT This memorandum is concerned with the organization of a branch of the S.0.1 office in New York for the purpose of propaganda on the American continent relating to Japsn. This organization will work in close liaison with S. 0. Singapore. OBJECTIVES   1. To influence Japan. 2. To influence public opinion on the American Continent concerning Japan. B. PROPAGANDA CHANNELS. 1. Articles and news items in the United States Canadian and South American press and magazines. 2. Broadcasts.  i To the United States Canadian  ii To the Far East. a. In English  from KGEI Treasure Island San Francisco. b. In Japanese 3. Cartoons.   i In the United States Canadian and South American press and magazines.  ii With Japanese captions for distribution a. Throughout the Far East. b. Among the Nisei populations on the West Coast of U.S.A. and Canada. c. Among Japanese settlements in South America 4. Rumours  i Among Japanese official and business circles correspondents shipping communities etc. inU.S.A. Canada and South America.  ii Among Nisei populations on the West Coast of U.S.A. and Canada.  iii Among Japanese settlements in 5. Material printed in Japanese.  i For distribution throughout the Far East if adequate printing facilities and translation personnel are not available in Singapore.,  ii For distribution among Japanese communities on the American Continent and on ships clearing for Japan from American ports. 6. Personal contacts with radio and press commentators. PERSONTiEL.   1. O/H Until such time as Singapore London or S.O. New York can recruit a suitable British Subject competent to replace him . The present duties of this position are to create an organization for the dissemination of propaganda as outlined above in collaboration with S.O. NEW IOPJC.    i It is essential that he should have access to confidential files and cables means for communication with London and Singapore and an office here confidential documents can be stored.  ii In view of the foregoing it would appear to be advisable that he should be a registered Government Agent working in the same office as S.0.1 headquarters in New York. 2. Other personnel. It is not possible at this stage to attempt an exact definition of personnel which will be required to develop and disseminate a flow of propaganda through the various channels indicated above. It is evident however that the following are likely to be required   a. One man in New York A professional writer with a sound knowledge of Japanese affairs and preferably with a reputation as an authority on Japan. His duties would include  i The writing of articles on Japan  ii The writing up of rumours and other material supplied by Singapore and London in the form of news stories for dissemination through S.0.1 facilities  iii Contacts with local press and radio commentators . 0/l21 has recruited Dr. C. N. Spinks for this post vide our telegram No. dated until a suitable substitute, -3   can be found after which it may be preferable to transfer Spinks to the Coast. One man in San Francisco.   With similar qualifications and similar duties. He should also be able to speak and to read Japanese. He would work with YPC San Francisco who has applied for a Vice-Consul from the Japan Service and is willing that part of the latter's duties would be to cooperate with our man. He would receive directives from New York through YPC. H s further duties would include    i The circulation of the West Coast of U.S.A. and Canada.  ii Scripts for broadcasts Japanese.  iii Compilation and distribution c. Cartoonist.  The services of Arthur Szyk eminent Polish cartoonist have been secured at no cost to ourselves.   d. Middle West It is important to arouse this Isolationist stronghold to the dangers of the Axis threat to the security of the American Continent by directing attention to German and Japanese activities in South America. The possibilities of exerting influence in this vast vast territory through the medium of the press have not yet been examined but if the necessary contacts can be secured it would be of value to place articles and news items in the Chicago St. Louis Kansas Denver and Minneapolis newspapers. e. Missionaries. The possibility of a series of lectures and broadcasts by missionaries recently returned from China and Japan is being examined. These might be of particular value in the Middle West. It may be possible to secure the services of two Canadian Missionaries Dr. C. J. L. Bates late President of Kwansei Gakuin University and Mr. G. A. Healey who was previously in South Formosa and recently working, -4   in the Information Department at the British Embassy Tokyo.   f. South America A survey of Axis activities and possible channels for counter propaganda is required. g. Canada. Propaganda directed from Vancouver among the Nisei population in British Columbia would appear to be most important objective in Canada. h. Washington. Washington is of importance as a rumour channel through the Japanese Embassy and because the Washington Post is regarded in Japan as an authoritative souce and is frequently quoted in the Japanese press. It may be possible for our man in New York to cover Washington also but a contact is required with the Japanese Embassy. Wilfrid Fleisher late of the Japan Advertiser and now Herald Tribune correspondent at Washington might be used as an unconscious channel to the Japanese Embassy and in other ways he would need to be handled carefully however. Dr. Spinks has flown to Washington to prospect Fleisher and to discover whether he maintains personal contacts with the Japanese Embassy. D. DIRECTIVES AND MATERIAL 1. Rumours. Directives will be supplied from London and Singapore. 2. Propaganda material. Material will be supplied to S.O. New York from London and Singapore. If suitable personnel is available background material and articles of general interest can be written up here but articles and news items can only be placed in the American press if they have news value. It is essential therefore that S.O. New York should be supplied with a flow of up-to-date factual material concerning Japanese activities in the Far East and concerning German activities in Japan.   E. GENERAL U, -5-   E. GENERAL The foregoing plan will largely depend for success on whether suitable personnel can be recruited and the requisite contacts be developed.   The following would be invaluable    a A first-calss journalist with a sound knowledge of Japanese affairs who can write with snap and vigour in the American style. Neither Spinks nor Byas come within this category.  b A recognized authority on Japan such as Sir George Sansome    mainly for contacts with press and radio commentators and in an advisory capacity.    c An expert on the Japanese language and psychology such as F. Hawley the British Council representative in Tokyo. Hawley recently mentioned to Spinks that he might be transferred to the British Library of Information New York. If it' could be so arrange this would afford excellent cover for Hawley who would be invaluable for S.O. propaganda work here mainly Jap anese contacts translation work research on background mat erial and the benefits of an unrivalled knowledge of the Japanese mentality and its reactions to present-day conditions. Hawley has a Japanese wife who would be most useful.   New York 20th May 1941, AP PEN PIX II   PROPAGANDA TO JAPAN   INTRODUCTION   Reduced to its simplest terms the situation as regards Japan is that the Army having lost out in China find it necessary to retrieve their fortunes by a Southern gamble. Otherwise the Army will lose face and los power. This they are determined not to do.   Unfortunately the prospects of a successful gamble appear bright. The N.E.I. is a tempting and apparently easy prize.   This expansionist policy is supported by all the MilitaristPatriotie- Fascist elements in Japan and by the Germans. Furthermore the Navy have always favoured Southward Expansion although now it comes to the point the chief opposition may come from the Navy owing to fear of combined U.S.-British naval power.   Appeals to reason will have little effect on the Militarist mentality. Little can be done other than a display of Anglo-American- .E.I. unity force and determination.   As regards propaganda the following are basis principles -   I. To those in control of power in Japan. Force and self-interests are the only argiiments which will in fluence the Militarists.   II. TO those not in control which will include the lower ranks of the armed forces.  a The Gods are angry with Japan. The militarists have for saken Japanese Gods for German Godsj they have opposed the divine wishes of the Emperor.  b Doitsu no mushi- the German worm .  c The reasons why this Militarist-German combination is mining Japan.  Note -   The character Doitsu German contains the character Mushi insect worm bug caterpillar . Doitsu no mushi gives a good visual effect for any printed matter dealing with Fifth Column. The analogy is obvious the German worm boring into the Japanese body politic the German grub in the heart of the   flower of Japanese Culture etc. ., MEMORAND U M PROVISIONAL PLAN OF PROPAGANDA TO JAPAN. Strategic objectives of HMG vis-a-vis Jaoan. It is assumed that the strategic objectives are   1. To prevent Japan from entering the war on the side of the Axis. .'O v   2. To minimize Japanese aid to Germany as a non-belligerent Ally. 3. To curtail Japanese southward expansion. 4. To reduce Japanese war potential. 5. If Japan enters the war to reduce Japanese capacity for offensive action against British Dutch and U.S. possessions. Our propaganda policy in relation to the foregoing objectives will be influenced by the following considerations    a The course of the European War a.nd particularly its effect on British sea power.  b The attitude of the W.S.A. and particularly the degree of Anglo-American cooperation in the Far East.  c The attitude of Russia.  d Chinese resistance and morale.  e The degree of aid which Germany is willing or able to give Japan by i containing Russia and ii supplying Japanese deficiencies in war materials and technicians.  f N.E.I. powers of resistance and morale.  g The ability A chief danger as regards Japan however is that irrespective of the foregoing considerations her future actions may be determined by internal political events. The Japanese people are acquiescing albeit unwillingly in the construction of a total tariaranachine which like Hitler's Germany must be fed on foreign conquests or the economic structure will collapse. A paramount propaganda objective therefore and possibly the most difficult to achieve is to find means to foster internal resistance to the new structure, -2   authoritarianism. Fimdamental Propaganda Themes.   Our main emotional themes must i provide fuel for the motives of fear mistrust and doubt which will serve to restrain Japan and ii seek to undermine the incentives which sustain her morale.   The motives likely to restrain Japan are   1. Fear of U.S.-British naval and air power. 2. Fear of Russia. 3. Mistrust of Germany and doubt of German ability to aid Japan in the event of war. 4. Doubt of Japan's strength. This wall be increased by confusion caused by internal dissensions. The incentives which sustain Japanese morale are 5. Belief in the Divine Mission of Japan. The intense patriotism and willingness to suffer great hard ships engendered by this belief in Japanese divinity find their focal point in worship of the Emperor. 6. Japanese pride. 7. Belief in the invincibility of the Japanese armed forces. A. FEAR OF U.S.-BRITISH NAVAL AND AIR POSER. This may be regarded as. the major Japanese fear as it includes fear of blockade and fear of bombing of Japanese cities. The following are the main categories under this theme    a Anglo-American unity of purpose as regards policy in the Far East. Absolute determination to resist Japanese aggression against British American or Dutch possessions in the Far East by armed force. Complete plans now agreed in detail between British U.S. N.E.I. and Australian authorities for concerted offensive and defensive action against Japan.  b Naval and air power would inevitably decide such a conflict.  c Suicidal of Japan to enter war while British fleet intact., -3-  Temporary immobilization of main units of British and U.S. Navies in other waters might allow some initial Japanese success but their full combined force would be turned against Japan at a later stage in the conflict. The only thing which would prevent this overwhelming cominationof naval power against Japan would be the destruction of the British fleet. Course of European war has proved that the combined German and Italian fleets and air   forces are incapable of inflicting serious damage to Royal Navy or to British   shipyards.    d Inexorability of naval power. Stress overwhelming strength of British and U.S. Navies Anglo-American building programmes and ship yard facilities as compared with Japanese Navy programme and facilities. While British yards relatively undamaged American yards cannot be damaged.  e Stress tremendous range and bomb-load of latest U.S. and R.A.F. bombers.  f Stress inadequacy of Japanese air-defences. Poor A.A. No shelters. Wooden houses inadequate fire-services lack of waterOpressure. c.f. magnificent German air-defences powerless against R.A.F.  g Play cn Japanese horror of fire. It is the fire which follows theearthquake that holds the real terror for the Japanese. Any Japanese city might be converted into a blazing inferno during a windy night by one bomber loaded with incendiaries.  h Horrors of total war for civilian population. The Japanese authorities have carefully concealed the horrors of war from the Japanese public c.f. banning of all newsreels showing terrified refugees burning houses aerial bombardment as seen by the bombed.  i Horrors of Blockade. Privations to be endured by civil population whose standard of living has already been reduced to a danger point as result of the China War.  Economic effects of Blockade. M.E.W. reasons why Japan could not withstand a long blockade., -4-   B. FEAR OF RUSSIA. This is an old bogey which should be kept alive but preferably as a sinister shadow lurking on Japan's flank rather than as an immediate threat to Japan. It must be assumed that Russian preoccupation with Europe is quite obvious to the Japanese her desire to seize opportunities which may occur in the West and her fear of Germany are good reasons why it is unlikely that Russia will attack Japan before her Western frontiers have been secured.   Nor is there any immediate danger whatsoever of Communist troubles in Japan.   Both the fear of Communism however and the fear of Russia as a military power have considerable value as ultimate considerations which cannot be ignored by the Japanese.   The main propaganda categories under this heading are    a Russia is Japan's ancient enemy and remains her real enemy.  b Do not allow yourselves to be fooled by Russian diplomacy which is the astutest in tie world. While other countries are prostrate dismembered or exhausting their energies in total war Russia is expanding her territories consolidating her frontiers and building up her reserves.  c Russia's Far Eastern policy is to encourage war between Japan and the Democracies. It may be regarded as an abolute certainty that in the later stages of such a war Russia will move against Japan as she moved against Poland  d Beware of Russia when she signs pacts of non-aggression and makes concessions she will be smoothing your path to destruction. At the moment Russia wishes to digest her European meal before beginning her Far Eastern repast and she may appear hesitant to come to terms.  e No move to the South can be safe until Japan's flank is fully secured. Vladivostok constitutes a permanent threat. Japan must first fight and beat Russia then move South. This is fundamentally sound strategy ask the Kwantung Army., -5    f On the other hand war between Germany and Russia in the not distant future is not an impossibility. If engaged in Southern ventures Japan .Till be unable to seize this Heaven-sent opportunity to lay the Russian bogey once and for all.  g Dangers of air attack from Russian bases. Russians would not hesitate to bomb open cities.  h Sinister Russian designs for the Communization of China as a prelude to bringing the whole of China under Russian control.  i Eventual dangers of Communism in Japan. C. MISTRUST OF GERMMY AND DOUBT OF GERMAN ABILITY TO AID JAPAN IN EVENT OF WAR. The Japanese authorities are not so foolish as to imagine that Germany is a reliable ally they are aware that Germany will break any all iance secret or otherwise immediately it conflicts with German interests. Japan's judgment of German intentions will be based not on promises but on the value of material benefits received. It is difficult for propaganda to detract from concrete values other than to point out that such material aid as Germany gives Japan is merely bait for the trap.   So far as those who control Ja.panese policies are concerned therefore it will be of less value to emphasize Germany's 'Black Record' than to produce reasons why German interests are fundamentally opposed to those of Japan.   The main categories under this heading are    a Don't allow yourselves to be fooled ty Germany as well as by Russia. You are playing at Power Politics with two Machieveliis. Between them they will encompass your downfall.  b Owing to her life-and-death struggle with England aftd to the Balkan situation Germany is desperately anxious to avoid a clash with Russia. Her best way to do this is to divert Russian attention to spoils in the Far East ty embroiling Japan in war with the Democracies. Germany will buy off Russia ty promising German aid in an attack on Japan at a later stage in the war, -6    c This of course fits in with the German plan vis-a-vis England and the U.S.A. Her only hope of winning the European war is to smach England this year Japan must play her part by an attack in the Far East to vreaken British resistance and to divert U.S. aid Germany has no intention of allowing Japan to control Far Eastern supplies of rubber tin oil etc.  d Every possible variation on the theme that Germany is using Japan as a catspaw. Example of Italy who came into the war when conditions appeared 100 favourable. Italy is finished her mantle is now to be handed to Japan for a brief space.  e M.E.W. reasons in war materials. Stress effects of bombing and blockade on German war industries.    f Strategic reasons with the democracies. D. DOUBT OF JAPAH'S STRENGTH Japan's main strength as regards her Southward Expansion policy is her strategic position her main weakness is economic. The Japanese Militarists unfortunately do not easily understand economic arguments. These   should be stated as simply and as forcibly as possible. The main categories under this heading are    a Weaknesses of Japan's economic position. Inability to with stand Anglo-American blockade.  b Vast economic resources of Anglo-American block.  c Strategic reasons why it would be difficult to take the N.E.I. and impossible to hold and develop them. Destruction of dll wells etc.  d Japan's naval weaknesses should ipe pointed out to the Japanese army authorities her military deficiencies to the Japanese Navy.  e Every effort should be made to increase friction between various Ministries M.F.A. and H0me Office War and Navy Ministries Metropolitan Police and Gendarmerie etc. and between He civil and Military authorities., -7-   E. TO UNDERMINE JAPANESE MORALE. The strength of Authority in Japanis rooted in State-fostered Emperor-worship. The common Japanese soldier fights and dies for the Emperor his family overwork and half starve on a farm for the Emperor. In the Arrty fields and factories the patient and industrious common people are sustained in their submission by the belief that they are serv ing the Emperor who embodies their divinity and the greater glory of Japan.   It is not possible for us to undermine what is possibly the greatest propaganda build-up of all time and one which has teken several generations to perfect. What is possible however is that Emperor-worship may prove to be a double-edged sword in the hands of the Militarists who forged it and who now seek to use it as the weapon which will drive the people of Japan to provide the sinews with which to fight the expansionist wars dictated by Militarist ambitions.   Similarly injured Japanese pride and national hysteria which are dangerous emotions when aroused might be turned against the German population in Japan. The latent anti-Foreignism of the Japanese has been carefully canalized into an anti-Britishhatred Britain the hidden enemy this has provided an outlet for the ever-growing sense of irritation and frustration caused by the prolonged hostilities in China and the increasing hardships and restrictions which must be endured by the Japanese people. If however British and U.S. subjects are withdrawn fron Japan practically the only foreigners left will be Germans. Should conditions continue to deteriorate their position will become dangerous i't would not take a great deal to turn the full force of national hysteria against the only remaining foreigb influence.   The weakest prop to Japanese morale is.faith in their armed forces this we may seek to undermine direct. The following are the main categories under tills heading, -8    a The Militarist-Fascists who now dictate Japanese policy are going against the wishes of the Emperor. They are forcing the people of Japan to suffer hardships and privations in order to fight a war which is contrary to the wishes of the Emperor.  b The Militarist-Fascists are not as they assert true Patriots. They serve Hitler not the Emperor. They are driven by lust for power and personal ambition. They would rather see Japan smashed in a ruinous war than relinquish the power they have seized.  c The Emperor's name is being used in van. Every possible means should be used to instil doubt in the minds of the Japanese people as to the relations between the Emperor and the Military c.f. the Emperor's refusal to sanction a Military Alliance with Germany in 1939  d Similar propaganda among Japanese troops in China c.f. the Japanese aeroplane which dropped leaflets over the rebel troops in Tolcyo during the February 26th incident calling upon the soldiers to lay down their arms because although they had obeyed their officers' orders these orders had been given contrary to the wishes of the Emperor. The soldiers immediately ceased to obey their officers and surrendered their arms.  e Japan is forsaking Japanese Gods for German Gods.  f The Germans and Japanese Militarists between them are to blame for all the misfortunes which have befallen and will increasingly befall the Japanese people.  g All available details of German Fifth Column activities in Japan. This should be a main and constantly reiterated theme it is as damaging to the pro-German elements in Japan as it is to the Germans them selves.  h The Japanese Home Office is now a branch of the Gestapo The German tail is wagging the Japanese dog. The outside world is laugh ing at Japan as the latest unconscious victim of German Fifth Column methods. When a German bows to the Imperial Palace he is laughing up his sleeve. There are many variations to this theme each one wounding to Japanese vanity or a reflection on Japanese patriotism and loyalty to the Emperor., -9    i the Japanese culture. It is necessary to explain why the best research in Japanese studies is being conducted by Germans. It is part of the carefully planned Fifth Column plot. German Japanologists if not themselves spies or Gestapo Agents act as stalking-horses for those who are. The study of Japanese cul ture was the thin end of the wedge that let the German Fifth Column into Japanese politids. The Cultural Pact paved the way for the anti-Comintern Pact.  j Why after four years' fighting does Prince Konoye say that the settlement of the China War seems as far away as ever China is a 4th-rate military powefi with no navy and no air-force worth mentioning. Is the Japanese Army no good Is it perhaps that the China War is contrary to the divine wish of the Emperor  k Germany conquered the French British Belgian and Dutch armies in a few weeks. Why cannot the Japanese army conquer the weak Chinese Is it because the Japanese Army is poorly mechanized Where are the Jap anese tanks What has happened to the billions of Yen voted to the Army  l How will the poorly mechanized Japanese Army fare against the British and Australians whose tanks swept the Italians out of North Africa  m Figures of Japanese casualties in China. If members of the Japanese public doubt these figures let them discover from their local War Association how many bereaved families there are in the particular  Ku in which they live work out the relation of the number of killed to the number of inhabitants and arrive at a rough total for a population of 80 000 000.    n Particulars of Japanese reverses in China and on the Russian frontier. March 23rd 1941, APPENDIX III and APPENDIX IV dated October 26 1941 and November 6 1941 sre appended for comparison with APPENDIX I which was written on the 20th of May   1941., APPENDIX III October 26 1941   FORTNIGHTLY PROGRESS REPORT SECTION G.0.3 -ORIENT   A. BROADCASTING Negotiations are proceeding  a to obtain 2 high-powered transmitters for Singapore as a Lease-Lend transaction. We are awaiting a telegram from /  the Malayan Broadcasting Corporation placing the order.    b for the creation of an independent 100 K.W. station at San Francisco for Far Eastern transmissions. These arrangements are affected b the M.B.C. order referred to in a .  c for unsupervised Chinese-language broadcasts from San Francisco to the Far East over KGEI to be recorded.  d to obtain proper supervision for c .  e to remove UPTON CLOSE Joseph Washington HALL from his recent appointment ty G.E. as manager of KGEI Chinese broadcasts. CLOSE whom we regard as dangerous is being investigated.    f to thwart G.E.'s plans to appoint an unsuitable successor to the present Manager of KGEI. G.E. are dismissing the latter as scapegoat for their own short-wave policy shortcomings Wq hope to arrange for a good broadcasting man known to us to be placed in charge of this station.  g to arrange for a San Francisco news room to be established    as a branch of Q's organization i to improve KGEI English   French and Dutch Far Eastern news commentaries and ii to coordinate the programmes of KGEI and the new station when the   latter commences operations., -2    h to obtain priorities for a 50 K.W. mediuia wave transmitter together with frequency conversion equipment for the Middle East probably Iran purchased by H.M.G. from R.C.4..  i to obtain priorities for various pieces of equipment ordered from different U.S. manufacturers by Malayan Broadcasting Corporation Singapore.  j to obtain data concerning field strength of Axis broadcasts received in Mexico Central and South America in order to recommend locations and power of transmitters which would be required to jam such broadcasts.  k to obtain particulars of the Soviet medium-wave station at KHABAROVSK with a view to arranging cooperation for the re broadcasting to Japan of KGEI short-wave Far Eastern transmissions. B. PAMPHLETS. 1. The following are now being distributed  i FREE WORLD edition of Naai 5th Column in Japan -by C. N. Spinks.  a in SPANISH 20 000 copies in MEXICO 20 000 copies in CHILE 25 000 copies in ARGENTINE 20 000 copies in URUGUAY 10 000 copies in COLOMBIA    b in PORTUGUESE 50 000 copies in BRAZIL  ii SOCIETY OF PATRIOTIC JAPANESE RESIDING ABROAD pamphlets in JAPANESE.  a Translation of SPINKS NAZI 5TH COLUMN IN JAPAN articles with introduction. 60 000 by hand among Japanese residents in West Coast areas 20 000 by mail among Japanese residents in West Coast areas,  b T 80 000 as in ii a  iii ASIA MAGAZINE pamphlet HITLER MEANS TO DESTROY JAPAN by Anton PETTENKOFER. About 35 000 copies in English by mail to Japanese residents in U.S.A. 2. Negotiations are proceeding with Q for distribution of pamphlets in Japanese in M tico Central and South America Hawaii Phil ippines etc. 3. Distribution of pamphlets in Japanese among Japanese in British Columbia has been discussed with the Canadian authorities who have promised to supply mailing lists and to pay for the cost of printing and distribution. MISCELLANEOUS    a ANTON PETTENKOFER. Asia Magazine article. London and Singapore have been requested to arrange publicity. The article has been sent to radio commentators in U.S.A. and a special 15 minute digest prepared for KGEI's Far Eastern transmission. Press and radio publicity in Mexico Central and South America is being arranged. A Japanese translation is being prepared.  b Carroll ALC0TT U.S. radio commentator from Shanghai was contacted on arrival at San Francisco arid put in touch with Q. Peport on German propaganda organizations in Shanghai obtained from ALC0TT. Plans to use ALC0TT are being discussed ith Q.  c Schedules of short-wsve broadcasts from Tokyo have been for warded to London and Singapore.  d Discussions are proceeding with Q and Library of Congress officials concerning an investigation of the loyalties of Japanese residents in U.S.A. and the formation of an anti- Axis Japanese society. Information is being prepared and it, -4   is hoped to send G501 to the West Coast to collaborate with a Library of Congress investigator    e Various articles news stories etc. have been prepared and handed to Q's New York Office. We are awaiting reports as to publicity achieved.  f B. & O.F. News Service between London and Singapore commenced operations. Owing to liquidation of B.O.F. temporary arrange ments to continue this service via Canada have been made. The Empire press rate for telegrams to Singapore represents an enormous saving in cable charges. The cost of the first telegram sent was 39.00 instead of 504.00. Means to continue the Singapore news service as a permanent arrangement are being in vestigated. News received from Singapore has been passed to Q for dissemination through Press and Radio. We are awaiting reports on publicity achieved.  g Articles by C. N. SPINKS have appeared in the Octobe issues of ASIA Magazine Bureaucratic Japan and the FAR EASTERN SURVEY Elder Statesmen of Japan .  h Satisfactory cover in Japan with United Artists organization has been arranged for an Agent through KORDA.  i Investigations of America First activities in California have been discussed with KORDA who will report from LOS ANGELES.  j G502 has been loaned to DEAKIN for work on America First.  k Material for a two reel short on the strategic position in the Far East to be produced by the Canadian Film Board is being prepared.  l Arrangements are being made to place Japanese pamphlets on Japanese ships calling at San Francisco.  m Directories of Japanese residents in U.S.A. are being collated to obtain a master mailing list.  n Articles on Japan have been prepared and handed to the Editor of the Chicago Daily News.  c Reports have been sent to London and Singapore concerning the, -5   posting of letters in Jsp an addressed to prominent Ji anese.   London has been requested to obtain a report from YP Tokyo as to reactions.    p Q was requested to arrange publicity for German forgeries of HANSARD sent to II.S.A. from Shanghai. Q is unable to do this and we are making other arrangements.  q A fortnightly safe-hand courier service between New York and San Francisco to connect with Clipper sailings to Singapore has been put into operation.  r An air mail clipping service to supply material for KGEI s Far Eastern commentators has been inaugurated. Suitable articles and news items are extracted from N.Y. morning and evening papers and are airmailed to the English French and Dutch Commentators.  s G512 who has been ill since he arrived October 3rd commenced work on October 15th.  t GOMPE TZ arrived 25th October.  u The liquidation of B. & O.F. has created problems of registration which make necessary to dispense with G511's services. London is being advised., APPENDIX IV   November 6th 1941.   FORTNIGHTLY PROGRESS REPORT SECTION G.0.3 -ORIENT   A. BROADCASTING  a A cable has now been received from the Ministry of Information authorizing G503 to p lace the order for 2 high-powered transmitters for Singapore under Lease-Lend. G503 has interviewed the Lease-Lend administration and the British Purchasing Commission in Washington and machinery has been set in motion to obtain the transmitters.  b  Lhe owner of KWID in San Francisco has agreed to purchase the 100 K.F. transmitter from General Electric on condition that this is purchased by tie Lease-Lend administration from him for shipment to Singapore within a few months see para a  c Chinese boradcasts radiated from KGEI are now being recorded.  d Q is working on proper supervision for hinese language broadcasts radiated by KGEI.  e Q has been highly disturbed by the information given him on UPTON CLOSE Joseph Washington Hall . He is obtaining a full report from X on this mah. In addition to having him removed from KGEI he will bring pressure to bear upon the National Broadcasting Corporation who employ him as their Far Eastern expert to remove him from the N.B.C. network.  f A suitable successor to KGEI's present manager is now being sought. We have been successful through Q in preventing the appointment of an unsuitable successor.  g Arrangements are proceeding to establish a program and news headquarters in San Francisco to provide programmes for KGEI and KWID. Miss Burke until recently with C.B.S. in Los Angeles has been appointed to set, up this organization as a branch of Q s office and is   arriving in New York in the course of the next few days   to discuss this with Mr. Murray Brophy and ourselves.    h London has been requested to send further details concerning the 50 K.lff. medium wave transmitter ordered for the Middle East. Without these details Q cannot obtain the required priorities.  i Priorities have been obtained for certain equipment ordered by the Malaya Broadcasting Corporation. This equipment previously held up has now been shipped.  j Acting upon information received from London we arranged for the rejection of an application by R.C.A. for an export licence to ship one 5 K.W. transmitter to the Radio Club of Macao. U.S. Naval Intelligence is investigating this order.  k We have arranged with Q's office that close liaison be maintained with the American Priorities Board s.nd those responsible for issuing Export Licences to Manufacturers. Q 's office has agreed to watch all orders for Radio Equip ment and the source from which the order originates will be throughly investigated to ensure that equipment ordered is not destined for Axis-operated Broadcasting Stations. Major manufacturers of transmitters and components are to be warned to report orders received. Mr. Robert SARNOFF of Q's Organization has charge of this matter. B. PAMPHLETS  a Distribution of the various pamphlets referred to in our Progress Report dated October 6 continues. 43 000 copies of the ANTON PETTENKOFER article have now been mailed to, -3   JapaneseinU.S.A. TheJapanesetranslationhaabeen completed.    b The cooperation of the U.S. authorities in the distribution of our Japanese language pamphlets outside the U.S.A. has again been taken up with Q s organization this time with Mr. ROBERT E. SHERWOOD. Further reports and information have been handed to Mr. Sherwood who is discussing the matter with General Miles and also the U.S. Navy.  c The F.B.I. and U.S.N.I. authorities in Los Angeles and San Francisco have been advised concerning the origins of the Japanese language pamphlets and arrangements are being made locally through U.S.N.I. for non-interference with dis tribution of our material.  d Copies of the Japanese language pamphlets were smuggled on board two Japanese tankers prior to their sudden departure from San Francisco a few days ago.  e 1000 copies of the Japanese language pamphlets were placed in passengers' and crew's quarters on the N.Y.K. TATSUTA MARU prior to her departure from San Francisco. Copies were also mailed to First Class passengers.  f Suggestions for the distribution in the Far and Middle East of posters and pamphlets to be prepared by Q have been discussed with Mr. Ed. STANLEY head of the Pictures and Publications Division. London and Singapore advised by telegam . Japanese translations of poster captions have been prepared for Q.  g A merican leaflets designed to be dropped from R.A..F. planes are being discussed with Q., -4-   MISCELLANEOUS    a Carroll ALCOTT has been interviewed and supplied with material concerning Nazi Fifth Column activities in Japan. Arrangements have been made for an article by ALCOTT to appear in LIFE Magazine. Further means to use ALCOTT will be discussed with him on his return to New York in two or three weeks time.  b A report received from G505 indicates that the ground may be favourable for the formation of an anti- Axis Japanese Society on the West Coast. After further discussions in Washington it was decided not to send G501 to the West Coast at present but to arrange for the Library of Congress investigator to be contacted by G510 in Los ngeles. his has been done.  c Confirmation has been given by Q that the Singapore B.O.F. news telegrams are providing valuable material which is being utilized so far as circumstances permit.  d An article by G501 entitled CONTINENTAL JAPAN has been accepted by ASIA Magazine.  e A brief summary of the strategic position in the Far East based on cable advices from London and Singapore has been handed to Mr. Stuart LEGGE representing the Canadian Film Board.  f Publicity has been arranged for the German forgery of Hansard which will be referred to in Carroll ALCOTT' Life Magazine article.    g Arrangements were made for G511 to terminate his pos ition with this office as of December 1st owing to the closing down of British and Overseas Features., -5    h Enquiries are being made concerning the activities of the Japanese New York Consulate General in view of persistent reports that Hirasawa is a key-man occupying a special position and sending independent reports direct to the Japanese Foreign Office.  i With great difficulty the State Department was in duced to arrange a priority for Major A. E. 01DWYER on the Clipper leaving San Francisco on October 6th for Singapore. We have been informed ty Q that further priorities cannot be provided for the time being. We will however persist in trying to obtain a return priority for Major O'DYiYER, APPENDIX V   September 1941   List of addressees of letters written from Washington by a member of   the Japanese Diet to personal friends in Japan.    Captain of S.S. Heiyo Maru sailed from Manzanillo   Mexico September 17 194l and posted these letters   on arrival in Japan   1. Prince Fumimaro Konoye Prime Minister. 2. Matsutaro Shoriki Publisher. -President of the Tomiuri Shimbun Sha. Generally considered most able and enterprising publisher in Japan. Somewhat nationalistic in views. On close terms with writer. 3. Count Kentaro Kaneko Member of Privy Council. One of drafters of Japanese Constitution. Born 1853-Graduate of Harvard University. At time of Russo-Japanese War on close terms with Theodore Roosevelt and acted as go-between between President and Japanese Government. Has held ministerial offices in several Cabinets. Is regarded as extremely pro-American and anti-Axis. Has been of great assistance to W. R. Wills in publishing Japan News-Week. Writer knows him well. 4. Masatsune OGURA. Member of House of Peers and director of Sumitomo Honsha of Osaka. Regarded as outstanding financial genius. Entered second Konoye Cabinet as Minister without portfolio. At present Finance Minister. Regs.rded as a moderate and as anti-Axis. Today he is one of the strongest men in the Konoye Cabinet ranking with Baron Hiranuma. 5. Shigemichi Miyoshi. Company director. President of Mitsubishi Oil Company and affiliated with a large number of other industrial concerns including Mitsubishi Aircraft Manufacturing Co. the largest private aircraft manufacturer in Japan. 6. Seiichi Takashima. Director Japan Economic Federation. Studied at University of London University of Zurich and University of Paris. Delegate to World Economic Conference Geneva 1927. Attended conferences of International Chamber of Commerce. Member of economic mission to the United States and Europe in 1937. 7. Yoshiharu NAGASHIMA. Company director. Executive director of Nippon Yusen Kaisha  N.Y.K.   8. Chokyuro Kadono President Toyo Rapid Transit Co. Vice-President Okura Gumi a large contracting firm. Affiliated with a large number of other concerns. Delegate to World Economic Conference, London 1933. Chairman Tokyo Chamber of Commerce and Industry.   9. Tsumeo Matsudaira. Minister of Imperial Household. Previous career in diplomatic service. Has attended a large number of inter national conferences and at one time was a delegate to League of Nations. Has been Minister of Imperial Household since 1936. Reported to be strongly anti-Axis. 10. Count Aisuke Kabayama Member of house of Peers. Affiliated with number of business concerns including Mitsui. Graduate of Amherst College. Attended number of international conferences. Chairman Board of Directors of Rjkusai Bunka Shinko-kai. 11. Marquis Tokugawa Cannot tell from letter whether this is Marquis Yorisada or Marquis Yoshichika Tokugawa. Both members of House of Peers. 12. Marquis Nobutsune Okuma. Member of House of Peers and honorary President of Waseda University. Advisor to Hochi Shimbun. Adopted son of late Marquis Okuma former Prime Minister. Affiliated with Mitsui Bussan Kaisha. In 1915 elected to Lower House of Diet. 13. Yosaburo Takekoshi. Member of House of Peers. Famous economic historian. 14. Dr. Koroku Hayashi President of Keio University. 15. Prince lyeraasa Tokugawa Son of late Prince lyesato Tokugawa. 16. Shingoro Takaishi Chairman board of directors Osaka Mai-Nichi. Director Tonichi Kaikan director Dome News Agency. Goodwill envoy to United States regarding Japan's case in Sino- Japanese conflict in 1937. 17. Viscount Tadashiro INOUYE Member House of Peers. Director Nippon Steel Works. 18. Admiral Mitsumasa Yonai Former Navy Minister and Prime Minister. 19. Mukai This is probably Tadaharu Mukai director of Mitsui and affiliated with various other concerns.   20. Ishida Possibly Reisuke Ishida Managing director Mitsui Bussan Kaisha. 21. Baron Kiichiro Hiranuma Former Prime Minister Home Minister and at present Vice-Premier and Minister without Portfolio. 22. Count Michimasa Soejima Member of House of Peers. Was Lord-in-waiting to Emperor Taisho when he was Crown Prince. Managing Director Japan Steel Works associated with Armstrong Vickers and Co. Known to be strongly anti-Axis., 23. Admiral Teijiro Toyoda Foreign Minister in present Cabinet. 24 Nobuya Uchida Member of House of Representatives. Affiliated with Mitsui. Railways Minister in Okada Cabinet 1934-1936 . Formerly of Minseito Party. Very close to writer.   25. Umekichi Yoneyama Member House of Peers. Affiliated with number of commercial concerns. Studied at Wesleyan University Ohio. Main business connections with Mitsui Trust Company. 26. Baron Ino Dan. . Executive Director Kokusai Bunka hinko-kai. Studied at Harvard University. Prominent in work of Jep an-America Society. Son of late Takuma Dan murdered by reactionary terrorists in Spring of 1932. 27. His imperial Highness Prince Chichibu. 28. Seihin Ikeda. Associated with Mitsui banking interests. Former Governor of Bank of Japan finance Minister and head of Price Policy Commission. 29. Matsuzo Nagai. Chairman Board of Direct0rs Kokusai Bunka Shinko-kai. Formerly in Japanese diplomatic service. 30. Tokichi Tanaka. Publisher. President of chugai Shogyo Shimpo. Chairman Board of Directors Dome News Agency. Formerly in diplomatic service and was once president of Japan Times and Mail now Japan Times and Advertiser . 31. Captain Tanaka. Captain of N.Y.E. vessel Neiyo Maru on which letters were sent to Japan from Manzanillo Mexico. Photostats of the original letters are in this office.   A translation of one of these letters is attached., The Mayflower   Washington D.C   At Washington September 12 194-1-   Baron Hiranuma   I was in the Panama Canal region when I heard of the unfortunate attack made upon your person and immediately sent a telegram inquiring after your welfare. I have been indeed anxious ever since concerning your recovery. Deeply concerned with the danger in the relations between Japan and the United States I left Panama on August 18th and came by air to Washington. Here I have been meeting numerous statesmen business men and diplomats with whom I have had conversation in an effort to bring about a.n understanding between Japan and the United States. The Imperial decision of yesterday seems to have improved the situation somewhat. SinCe a Japanese-American war at this point would be disastrous I hope that you will do your utmost to prevent if from occurring.   The work The secret activities of the Nazi Fifth Column in Japan by the former professor at the Tokyo University of Commerce Mr. Spinks which I am sending you has caused wide attention in the United States and in order that the United States should not share a similar fate an American patriotic society has reprinted this article for distribution among the American people. Unless the activities of Hitler's Fifth Column in Japan is suppressed I fear that Japan will become a vassal state to Hitler. I sincerely hope that you will talk this matter over nth Mr. Tanabe the Home Minister and cause adequate action to be taken on the matter. The fact that Hitler's Fifth Column does not stop at assassination and other such acts is indeed prejudicial to our national dignity.   I pray for your Excellency's health. I expect to return some time in November.   I am sending this by air mail to Mexico to catch the Heiyo Maru leaving there on the 16th inst., ARCHIVES 57/   5.o.t H'VfoAy   FILE NUMBER SUBJECT SOE HISTORY 49 AMERICA SECURITY DIVISION ACTIVITIES VOLUME FROM UNDATED TO, PART VI   SECURITY OF PROPERTY AND PERSONNEL   CHAPTER 1 THE SECURITY DIVISION BEFORE PEARL HaRBOUR    a BSC Takes Over  b The Factories  cj Consular Security Officers CHAPTER II INDUSTRIAL SECURITY OFFICERS    a The Vital Industries of Latin America  W The Beginning of the Organization  c I  CHAPTER III THE SECURITY OF PERSONNEL   1   CHAPTER IV SECURITY IN THE FINAL PHASE j 7 - i, CHAPTER I   THE SECURITY DIVISION BEFORE' PEARL HARBOUR   a ESC Takes Over b The Factories c Consular Security Officers.   a BSC TAkBS OVER   During the year and a half of the European war which elapsed before the passage of the Lend-Lease Act Britain was in the position of having a vast amount of her resources of production supply shipping and foreign investment situated in a country which was under no obligation to   protect them. Yet it was vital that they should be protected.   In the United States there are 6 000 000 German-speaking Americans and 4 000 000 Italian-speaking Americans. Many of these American citizens were employed as workers in the factories whA'ulniMJJi'o producing British war material Some of them were labourers in thefreight yards or employees of the railways which transported British property and      others were stevedores loading British ships. It was a dangerous   situation. A wide scale sabotage campaign in the private factories producing arms for British account or against the large proportion of Britain's 20 000 000 tons of shipping which used American ports could have proved disastrous.   Moreover It was known that the organization and resources of the enemy in the United States in combination with the potentially subversive elements which already existed there were ample for this task. Enemy agents were scattered throughout the forty-eight states and each one knew well that he could rely upon the assistance active or passive   of the many thousands of members of militant German Bunds. And there, 2   were others who would help. There were the isolationistsj there were the business men with European interests there v ere the nationalist Indians the anti-British Irish and in increasing volume the Communist-influenced left-wingers preaching against 'the imperialist war1 while Soviet hUSSxa was still apparently/friendly terms with Germany. The Communist-dominated   National Maritime Onion of America was bitterly attacking the despatch of American ships into the war zones and any form of O.S. intervention. Its   lawyers had developed various ingenious techniques of delaying Allied vessels by suborning members of Chinese and other crews to refuse to   sail at the last moment without new and extravagant equipment. All these   people and their organizations were giving either direct or indirect help to the Nazis.   In the summer of 1940 before BSC came into being some tentative steps had been taken to combat the danger. A Credit and Investigation Section and a Shipping Security Section had been formed under cover of the British Purchasing Commission. These two sections were doing what they could with the meagre resources and facilities available to them. The former endeavoured to establish the reliability of firms working for British account. The latter took measures designed to ensure the safe loading of supplies from wharf to ship. But their work in comparison with the magnitude of the danger fell far short of necessity.   What was required was a security organization that would maintain specialized departments to devise measures for the physical protection   and security of British property to advise on security steps and anti   sabotage precautions for factories railroads shipyards and docks to investigate and report upon sabotage subversive activities. Communist   influence amongst labour unions and the suborning and desertion of crews   to vet the reliability of manufacturing companies and also of individuals, 3   applying for jobs in British missions in the O.S.A. Finally to establish   the closest possible liaison with American and Canadian departments con cerned with all these activities with the FBI the RCMP the U.S. and Canadian Service intelligence organizations the Customs and Immigration and the local police and port authorities.   Shortly after his arrival in the United States WS suggested that a security organization should be formed to undertake all these duties and as a result BSC came nto being in January of 1941. while it provided cover for SIS and SOE activities its sole overt purpose was the safe guarding of British interests in the United States.   4 programme of expansion was at once launched. The Security Division within BSC absorbed the old Shipping Security Section and the Credit and Investigation Section. It was responsible for the security of i British war material in production and in transport to ships    ii shipping and iii personnel and premises of British Missions in the U.S.A. In time it was entrusted with other important duties to be described hereunder and shortly before Pearl Harbour assumed responsibility too for the safeguarding of British interests in South America. b THE FACTORIES British orders for war material in the United States prior to Pearl Harbour amounted to some 4 000 000 000. Of this 300 000 000 was invested in British government-owned plants and extensions of existing plants. It was the duty of the Security Division to safeguard these assets in  every way possible. The first step was obviously to vet the firms   producing the war materials. In order to do this the British Purchasing   Commission whenever any contract was in negotiation approached the   Security Division of BSC and asked for a check of the contractor from two, 4   points of view. Was he financially reliable and was he completely free from any connection with the enemy Ihe first check was made through credit agencies banks and financial houses the second through direct investigation and by obtaining all possible information from the FBI and other relevant U.S. Government agencies.   After the firm had been vetted and the contract signed it was necessary to make sure that the factory producing the war material was secure. Here advantage was taken of an existing clause in all British contracts with American firms which provided for technical inspection of the product at various stages of manufacture and upon its completion. These inspections were carried out by the Inspection Board of the United Kingdom and Canada with headquarters in Ottawa an office in New York and a large technical staff in the field. BSC established liaison with this field staff and secured the assistance of one of the administrative officers of the Board. The latter's particular duty was to visit all factories working for Britain to safeguard the welfare of the residentinspection staff and to settle a large variety of other personnel problems. In collaboration with him BSC prepared a standard form covering the security status of each factory to be completed by the administrative officers in the course of their inspection. At the same time the officer recruited assistants of his own to report back to him on the maintenance of protective measures. With the resultant information the Security Division was able to draw up a complete survey of all British contracts placed with U.S. factories and to examine the security conditions prevailing in each plant.   Essential as it was to adopt rigid security measures BSC had   no legal authority to enforce such measures in American factories on American soil and before the passing of the Bend-Lease Act there was little, 5   assistance forthcoming from the U.S. military authorities. BSC therefore approached the manufacturers themselves and though great care and tact had to be exercised was eventually able to persuade nearly all of them to cooperate in taking every possible precaution against sabotage in their   own plants. At the same time the British Purchasing Commission was prevailed upon to adopt a sabotage clause in its standard form of contract. In this clause the manufacturer undertook to maintain all reasonable   precautions against sabotage and to advise the Purchasing Commission of any actual or attempted sabotage in his factory. Obviously the fact that the manufacturer would himself have to sustain any losses made him all the more willing to take care that official security measures were enforced. In this he was assisted by a set of recommendations which was issued by BSC to all American plants working for British account. Therein advice was given upon how to prevent the infiltration of saboteurs or   enemy sympathizers.   After the passage of the Bend-Lease Act American defence production began to increase and American authorities took a much more active interest in the prevention of sabotage in factories. Tj liaison   War'   with the FBI and with the War Department which the Security Division had already established became closer. The FBI however were on the point of relinquishing their responsibility although they retained the right to investigate all cases of possible sabotage after they had occurred.' T he War Department and specifically the Office of the Under-Secretary of War became the main point of contact and in September 1941 the Under secretary circularized all departments of the U.S. armed forces inviting them to cooperate with the British in   physical protection of factories vetting of employees enforcing regulations applying to visitors, 6   controlling guard personnel investigating suspected sabotage investigating slow-ups investigating subversive activities investigating labour conditions generally   t. It was specified that the cooperation should be with the Administrative   Officer of the Inspection Board who was now formally transferred to the staff of BSC. This move put the Security bivision in direct touph with about one thousand inspectors employed by the British government in   factories throughout the United States. At the same time BSC set about the task of instructing the   in Americans/what good factory security meant. It was found that the most effective method was to take them on inspection tours of protected British factories pointing out the dangers and the safeguards and allowing them to draw their own conclus'ons. In November 1941 the U.S. Government issued a directive which stated. inter alia ...the plant protection project of the U.S. Government will be extended to nclude....inspection of plants in which British orders only are undertaken... . This it should be remembered was at a time when America was still neutral.   After the material had been produced in the factory the next step was to get it safely to the ship. Officers of BSC's Security Division undertook a 24-hour inspection of all railway-yards railway   termini and deep-sea piers which handled goods for Britain. They contacted the local police and fire departments the port control officers the   Coast Guard the shipping boards and the Army and Navy agencies. T ey talked with them all at length and eventually each was persuaded to cooperate fully in instituting proper systems of protection to ensure that goods and munitions found their way safely from the factory to the   wharf. Whenever goods wer4 not delivered whenever they were damaged   \, 7   in transit or appeared to have been inadequately protected BSC investigated the causes and took steps to have them removed. A series of reports were   compiled dealing in detail with the innumerable issues involved and the recommendations made in the reports were adopted as basic rules by the Americans when they entered the war.   c COHSPLAR SECURITY OFFICERS    / //// 6i' . ft S i it  Having done all that was possible to ensure that the war material was not sabotaged either during manufacture or on its journey to the coast the next step was to see that it was loaded safely from the wharf to the ship to see also that those British ships which came to  merican ports to collect the cargo were not damaged whilst in harbour.   The problem of handling and loading presented a number of dif ficulties of which labour trouble was the chief. It was not only the dock workers who were potential trouble makers but the seamen from the ships as well. Nearly all of this trouble was inspired by the Nazis and their confederates who knew that an uninterrupted flow of war material from the   United States was Britain's only hope of survival.   In all the ports anti-British groups and organizations spread their propaganda. The Communist-influenced National Maritime Union and the Scandinavian Seamen's Club did much to foster desertions amongst Greek Chinese and Scandinavian seamen. Other organizations instigated strikes amongst the dock workers and in one way or another did everything they could to prevent or slow down aid to Britain.   The situation was a serious one. WS decided that an organization must be set up under the Security Division which would cover all the major ports in the United States that men should be selected who had a wide   experience of merchant shipping and a profound knowledge of the district, in which they were to serve. Plans were made and discussed with H.M. Embassy in Washington with DNI Ottawa. and with various authorities in London. .JA'They were approved. Men who would henceforth be known as iJ'r Consular Security Officers CS0& were stationed to serve at  Baltimore Mobile San Francisco Boston New Orleans San Pedro Galveston New York Savannah Houston Philadelphia Seattle Los Angeles Port Arthur Tampa Miami  These ports served 95 of all the British shipping which touched   the United States and the duties of the new CSOs included the maintenance of constant vigilance against the entry aboard of saboteurs in the guise of visitors repairman stevedores ship-chandlers the checking of physical   anti-sabotage equipment such as screens and nets the protection of   seamen from the attentions of those anxious to learn their secrets the   suppression of news of ships' cargoes movements and convoys.   Despite the exposed situation of many port areas in the United States particularly New York where one of the more successful German informants later arrested needed only to ride back and forth on the Staten Island Ferry to secure his information the system proved very   effective. In fact by midsummer of 1941 the experience gained combined with the ever-increasing spread of war activity demonstrated beyond   doubt that a similar system was essential in the ports of South America   where British vessels called for foodstuffs and strategic minerals. In August just a year after the German High Command had sent to Rio de Janeiro   a coordinator and administrator for their embryonic sabotage organization the head of the Security Division of BSC left New York with the mission of establishing CSOfe in the south. In this task the intimate knowledge, 9   which he possessed of outh America and particularly of British shipping problems there proved invaluable. As a result of six crowded weeks of travelling CSO . selected mainly from among' the personnel of the great British shipping houses were appointed and instructed in their duties in twenty-six ports of hine countries covering over 90 of British-controlled shipping ifa South America. They were stationed at   Antofagasta Chile La ibertad Ecuador Bahia Blanca Argentina Las Piedras Venezuela Bahia do Sao Salvador Brazil Mamonal Colombia Barranquilla Colombia Maracaibo Venezuela Belem do Para Brazil Montevideo Uruguay Buenos ires Argentina Panama Panama Callao Peru Puerto La Cruz Venezuela Caripito Venezuela Recife Brazil Cartagena Colombia Rio de Janeiro Brqzil Cumarebo Venezuela Rio Grande do bui Brazil Guiria Venezuela SiUtos Brazil Iquique Chile Tocopilla Chile La Guayra Venezuela Valparaiso Chile  BSC was thus ready for the intensive submarine campaign which Opened with such ferocity in the Caribbean and upon the western shores of South America six months later.   It is perhaps worth while to review the situation existing in October 1941 when the head of the Security Division returned from South America. Though the German attack on ussia had won over the   Communists and their large labour following to support of aid to Britain   a month-long strike at the Federal Shipyards at Kearney was holding up two American cruisers under construction while John L. Lewis was about to order a serious coal stoppage. The Isolationist America First organization    See Part ll though showing signs of strain boasted a membership of 900 000 and was working feverishly to blacken the Allied cause and avert U.G. aid. At Camp Nordland New Jersey the German Bunds met   Sunday ty Sunday while in the streets of Hoboken where a German Seamen's, 10   Mission overlooked the waterfront Allied seamen were openly suborned to desert their ships. The U.S. vessel Panuco lying in dock in Brooklyn   and loaded with drums of oil for the great O.S. naval base at Guantanamo   Cuba caught fire and was completely destroyed with pier and barges and the loss of 20 lives.   It was in such an atmosphere that the machinery of the Security Division began to work at full pressure. As regards shipping security CS0 in the United States had long since established liaison with local naval and coast guard FBI customs and police officials though relations were unofficial and in many cases extremely delicate. CSOs. now supplied and vetted shore-watchmen for British vessels and inspected the latter's anti-sabotage measures. i-hey guarded crews against suborners and combatted the mass desertions of Chinese seamen. They watched the security cargoes of material lying on the docks for shipment nd they participated whole-heartedly in welfare work which was a major contribution to security.   In all the posts in the United States where CSOs were stationed and in many of those in South America clubs and hostels were established for seamen. Th.ese clubs did excellent work. They served the triple purpose of keeping Allied seamen in good heart of protecting them from Axis-inspired attempts to provoke discontent and strikes and of steering them away from resorts where drink or other inducements might loosen their tongues.   Discreetly little by little the CSOs began to persuade their   American colleagues to become security-minded. Finally they prov'ded. valuable information about enemy agents labour agitators and such unusual arrivals as the Swiss SS St. Cergue which sailed into New York on July 31 1941 from German-occupied Rotterdam with one of the most, 11   suspect crews ever assembled.   At the same time the head of the Security Division established contact with the British National Union of Seamen in America. The liaison which was made with the Union delegates produced the most salutary results   for the delegates assisted in solving labour disputes and in seeking out evil characters. They reported upon every genuine difficulty which was encountered. Men would complain that they were unfit for work that their   ship was dirty or unseaworthy that their officers were harsh and so forth. xhe Union delegate would investigate. If the seamen were malipgering or exaggerating he had the authority as the representative of their own Union to quash their complaint. If he found it justifiable the matter   headquarters was reported to the CSOS who in turn informed BSC/ and action was taken to meet it. A system of communication was set up between the Security Division one and the CSOS. in the various ports and between/CSO and another. Cable communications were sent in code while a weekly safe hand service was established for less urgent reports. The CSOA were encouraged to send full reports on their activities to the Security Division. Whenever a ship arrived in port the CSO filled in a standard Ship Inspection Report noting the essential facts about the ship's arrival and departure cargo crew and watchmen. This contained a chart showing deficiencies in security found by the OSO during an inspection and space for remarks. One copy of this report was sent to the Security Division a second was placed in a sealed envelope and handed to the master for transmission to the CSO at the next port of call and the third was kept by the CSO himself for the record. Any grave or repeated violation of security regulations was reported to BSC which in tarfa passed the report to London for action. The CSO'i in South America not only carried out similar duties   but had to adapt themselves to the varying political conditions asst, 12   and sympathies of local port officials and police. Only later was it confirmed that even as they were being appointed to their posts clandestine German radios were already transmitting to Berlin the names departures and cargoes of the very vessels which the CSOs were bound to protect. A Nazi sabotage network had been standing by for word from Berlin to strike at British shipping in South American harbours.   When the United States entered the war in December 1941 American officials expressed the desire that the CSO organization should continue to look after British and Allied shipping. Some time later the U.S. Coast Guard even agreed to accept CSO inspection of an Allied ship in lieu of their own. In U.S. ports the Americans supplied military guards for British transports but the responsibility for their safety was shared by the CSOs. In New York harbour the CSO had ten assistants. He divided the harbour into three zones. A round the clock watch was kept on each of these by members of his staff who reported hourly by telephone to a central number. Continuous eight-hour watches were kept upon the two most important British vessels the Queen Mary and the Queen Elizabeth. In their case as in all others the closest attention was paid to preventing smoking and to keeping out unauthorized visitors and anyone   under the influence of alcohol. A pass system was rigorously enforced. Workmen and crew were searched both upon embarking and debarking. All packages and tool-kits were inspected.   In result not a single British ship was lost or seriously held up by accident or sabotage in a United States port throughout the whole war. When the Normandie caught fire sank and capsized in February 1942   because sparks let fly by a welder fell upon a heap of Kapok lifebelts later enquiry showed that of the eight British recommendations regarding welding practice copies of which had already been supplied to the Captain, 13   of the Port of New York no less than five were being violated.   Meanwhile in Latin America the CSO organization was expanded and consolidated and with the increasing establishment of U.S. naval security officers Anglo-American liaison there became likewise of primary importance. Many CSOs had desks in the U.S. Naval Intelligence officers'   J  rooms or vice versa. Hundreds of ONI reports were passed to BSC. In the   h   Lx r  spring of 1942 a British-U.S Naval houteing Agreement provided for   the transfer of the protection of merchant shipping 'within strategic   waters of the Western Hemisphere' from the British to the U.S. Navy and   except for a skeleton liaison service British Naval Control withdrew from   South American ports. However the CSOs were specifically exempted from this order by the Combined Chiefs of Staff and the incoming U.S. naval officers were directed to collaborate with them unreservedly. Thus the   money drive and diplomatic and economic pressure available to the   o   Americans were reinforced by the knowledge and experience of the CSO s many of whom as remarked above were professional shipping men.   These arrangements were completed just in time. The intensive German submarine campaign upon the Atlantic shores of Douth America began in the spring of 1942. Tankers were sunk carrying crude oil from Maracaibo   to the Netherlands West Indies. Vessels were torpedoed by the dozen   from the Carolines to Curacao and between February and September 1942 no less than 23 ships carrying bauxite from the sole British source in the   Guianas to Canada were sent to the bottom.   These campaigns involved the CSOs in concentrated effort to suppress leakage of shipping Information and to track down suspicious longshoremen port officials newspaper reporters and others who might be serving as German -informants. In the United States countless bars, where seamen were reputed to have been pumped for information were investigated with the help of the FBI and Army G-2 who in some oases placed   i  day and night surveillance on the suspects. In South America much of this work had to be done by the CSGs themselves in default of local aid. I'hey drew up lists of undesirable resorts in every port to warn crews of in coming vessels further they were concerned to stop the publication of   information about shipping movements in the press and to prevent communication   of such information by radio letter or telegram. As a result of joint British-U.S. diplomatic pressure legislation to this effect was secured in   most South American countries in the first half of 1942 but in many cases   there remained the problem of securing its enforcement. CSOS. had to   plead with cajole and threaten local port officials. They had to go   over their heads to higher authorities and they had painfully to gather   proof of the offences committed and the dangers involved.   Gradually the situation was improved. Newspapers dropped their shipping columns photography in port areas was forbidden docks were cleared cables censored and pass-systems instituted here was in some cases a natural wave of local resentment as citizens found their seashore promenades curtailed their communications made more difficult and their   right to dispose of bad liquor to ships in the bay denied.   By the summer of 1943 the Security Division was employing 31 CSOS with their staffs in the United States and 45 in Latin America. In a single period of three months CSOfe in North America carried out over   5 000 inspections on nearly 800 ships and in 5outh america over 2 500 inspections on 859 vessels. This gives an annual total of approximately 30 000 anti-sabotage inspections aboard British-controlled merchant ships. In this way the CSOS helped to preserve the ships. But second   only to the preservation of the ships themselves was the saving of tonnage, 15   time by providing for their quickest possible turn-around in the various ports of call. Here CSOS were able to help by arranging with local police to return drunken seamen to the gangplank rather than hold them in gaol and by establishing launch services to vessels lying in the stream. In some countries and particularly at Buenos they assisted in the prevention or the terminating of strikes of stevedores and shipyard workers.   The CSOS in Latin America cooperated most usefully with ether BSC agents in preventing the smuggling of small bulk strategic commodities such as platinum and industrial diamonds. With their multiple waterfront contacts and with their countless shady sources they were able to con tribute a continual flow of dependable information on the traffic and   the elements responsible.   CSOS were required by Consuls-General to assist in the control of neutral vessels. In particular they were able to help in preventing the abuse of ships' stores facilities. The CSO at Buenos Aires for instance drew up a scale of stores allowable to Spanish ships which was later adapted by MEW for general use. Soon after in January 1944 the CSO at Montevideo noted that Spanish ships calling at Brasilian ports were in the habit of loading excess stores there on the plea of ignorance. Necessary action was taken and the traffic satisfactorily curbed.   Then just before the invasion of France to prevent accidental leakage of information concerning it a system was introduced whereby   U.S. Censorship intercepts of indiscreet letters from seamen on Britishcontrolled ships could be passed to the appropriate CSO's who in turn would arrange for masters to reprimand the writers. Admiralty cable channels were made available to reach ships which had already sailed in, 16   no matter what part of the world they might be. As a result seamen who had posted indiscreet letters in the United States or South America were surprised to find themselves being severely reprimanded in Karachi or Capetown. I'he deterrent effect of such cases resulted in a sudden decrease of violations to a negligible level.   These are but a few examples of the tasks performed by CSOS There were many more and not all of them were undertaken as a result of directives from headquarters. CS03 had above all to be men of initiative with ability to improvise according to necessity., 17   CHAPTER II INDUSTRIAL SECURITY OFFICERS a The Vital Industries of Latin America b The Beginning of the Organization c ISO's in Operation.   a THE VITAL INDUSTRIES OF LATIN AMERICA From the oil wells of Venezuela and from the refineries of the Dutch West Indies came 80% of the fuel oil used by the Royal Navy and a great quantity of the aviation gasoline used by the RAF. From the bauxite mines of the British and Dutch Guianas came 76% of the aluminium available to the Allies. While it was the job of the Consular Security Officers organization to protect the tankers carrying the crude oil from Venezuela to the Dutch West Indies and to protect the ships carrying aluminium ore from the Guianas to North America it became obvious that another branch of security was essential an industrial security organization which would undertake the protection of vital sources of strategic materials in South America the factories where they were processed and the transportation channels along which they moved to the sea. In July 1941 theBSC representative in Trinidad had visited   t   the Bauxite mines of British Guiana. These mines which produce over a million tons of bauxite annually became after the Germans overran the European countries the only important source from which Great Britain and Canada could obtain the ore. The mines lie at Mackenzie 65 miles up the Demerara River from Georgetown. Destruction of the power plant would it was estimated have stopped production for   nine months. And since ore is carried down river by shallow dr&ught ships and two of the bars could not be passed by a loaded vessel except at, 18   high tide the scuttling of a single vessel at the right point would have choked the channel for weeks.   Unrest among the negro labourers and among the British 'East' Indians in the colony had early in 1941j led to a strike and something approaching a riot. Guards for the Mackenzie plant were twenty negro police who could hardly be expected to ward off a really determined attack. Previous recommendations by the officer commanding troops in Trinidad had not been carried out and the Governor agreeing that the danger was great added that he would welcome the presence of white British troops. In his report the BSG representative recommended an   increase in guards on ships and in the factory the erection of an unclimbable fence around the factory area and full examination of the bauxite ships by naval boarding personnel he first two recommendations were met after a fashion the third was neglected. The Governor was supplied with 50 sub-machine-guns and instructed to mobilize the local militia.   / But as the war spread and Japan conquered most of the Far East it was plain that these precautions were inadequate. In February 1942 the Security Executive suggested a thorough survey of the entire bauxite position in British Guiana covering every stage between the mining of the ore and the final shipment to Canada. The head of the Security Division set out immediately visiting British Guiana Dutch Guiana and the new dump at Chaguaramas in Trinidad and the trans-shipment port of St. Thomas in the Virgin Islands.     Briefly it was found that in British Guiana there was some  \   r   security and no defence. In Dutch Guiana there was defence and no security   while in St. Thomas there was crew trouble which grew more serious every week after the Caribbean submarine campaign had started and there was no, 19   defence whatever. In Dutch Guiana the Americans had already landed some troops but the officers did not regard factory protection as part of their duties and neither the Governor nor the Alcoa officials were interested in security. The BSC officer impressed upon the management both necessity and method and persuaded a Colonel of the U.S. Army Intelligence to explain it to the officers and to the Governor. For St. Thomas he made suggestions for starting a canteen and for advancing D.S. currency to Canadian crews and held a meeting of the American and Canadian Aluminium company heads with their shipping managers at which he obtained a promise that all his recommendations would be carried out. For British Guiana he recommended once more that white troops should be provided. And after some negotiation between the Colonial Office and the War Office and the Government of Canada a detachment of hand-picked Canadian officers and men was seconded to British Guiana where it arrived in   May 1942.   This instance has been described in some detail because it is illustrative of the general problems of industrial security in Latin America which the Japanese conquest of the Far East had now made absolutely vital to the Allied war effort. The continent was rich. Eventually it could supply everything the Allies needed except rubber. But it was under-populated its communications were poor its societies weak and unstable. Most of its areas producing strategic material were not integral parts of'J .. state like the Black Country or the Ruhr   but rather colonial developments sometimes standing by themselves far   in the juhgle or isolated in the desert so that it was difficult to provide them with effective military or police protection. Finally the inhabitants who did not own these resources had little interest in safe   guarding them., 20   The risk of direct military attack receded as the United States despatched troops aircraft coastal guns and light patrol boats to the Galapagos Natal Tocopilla and elsewhere. But there remained the prob ability that the Axis would attempt to disrupt the sources of strategic supplies in Latin America by sabotage or by fomenting strikes or revolutions and this fear was proved well grounded by the subsequent unmasking of a widespread German sabotage ring See PartVII .   Before appropriate action could be taken it was necessary to convince both London and Washington of the danger inherent in the situation and of the need to combat it. At WS's instruction the SOE Division compiled a report on 'Axis Strength in Latin America' which was based on information supplied by agents in the field. It drew attention to the large German colonies to the active and well organized Nazi organizations to the widespread influence of Germany upon govern ments officials and army officers to the vulnerable and unguarded coastal areas and to like factors which jeopardized the security of strategic industries. 'i he report was sent to H.M. Embassy to the headquarters of SOE and SIS to the FBI cto Uene-ral Donovan ctrld to the-ROMP   At the same time full lists of essential commodities arranged in order of priority were obtained from the Ministry of Economic Warfare in Washington and from American sources. In May 1942 a talented British chemical engineer was recruited in Trinidad and requested to survey the possibilities of sabotage in all the industries which were essential to the war effort. He worked with the assistance of the SOE staff and had access to all relevant information from expert sources. In result a report entitled The Physical Security of Strategic Raw Material Supplies from Latin America was produced and this estimated that the following were the most important materials supplied by Latin, America They are set out in order of the percentage of total Allied needs.   Metals   Other Products   Antimony   Bauxite   Tin Mica   Vanadium Tungsten   Chromium Mercury Petroleum   Copper   Balsa Wood Quinine   Sisal Rubber   43% from 35% from 40% from 36% from 54% from 28% from 10% from 37% from  Mexico   Bolivia Dutch Guiana British Guiana   Bolivia   Brazil Argentina Peru   19% from Bolivia   from   26% from   26% from   12.4% from 2.3% from 1.3% from   1.2% from 1.15%   7%   from 17% from   from 45% from   99-55%   28% from 12% from   Argentina   Cuba   Mexico   Venezuela Mexico Colombia Argentina Trinidad Chile   Ecuador   Bolivia Colombia Ecuador and Peru Mexico Brazil   The report pointed out that enemy sabotage could attack these materials at seven distinct points    1 %ource of the material oil wells mines growing crops.  2 processing plants  ore dressing mills refineries sawmills.  3 Stocks of materials  oil timer cotton.  4 peans of transport  railways river channels airlines.  5 services  water supplies electric power installations and hydro-electric plants., 22    6 jsitaff  skilled technicians.  7 .abour. In the light of these conclusions the report examined every material separately indicating the danger point which would have to be safeguarded. Antimony for example is sorted and crushed mostly by   primitive methods so the only two danger points are labour and trans portation. Labour troubles can be avoided only by cultivating good labour relations. As regards transportation Bolivian antimony has to pass over more than 500 miles of lofty mountain and deep valley by the Antofagasta railway. Sabotage can be avoided only by protecting the railway.   -The report was sent to the Chiefs of Staff in London who after studying it telegraphed to the Joint Staff Mission in Washington on   Juixe'9th 1942  We are anxious to see aBs end of Axis machinations in Latin America which constitute serious potential threat to Allied supplies... 4 ur policy in regard to secret anti-Axis activity has been one of laissez faire to avoid risk of upsetting Latin American   security measures to prevent sabotage to ships and cargoes have been organized in all major ports by British Security Coordination....except for this Axis have virtually had a free run. t is therefore highly important that secret work should start quickly. 4 have recommended to Ministers concerned that resources of both SIS and SOE should be made available.   have also recommended that British Security   Coordination should extend their overt security, 23   measures.   Two weeks later the head of Security Executive in London wrote to WS saying    ....It has been agreed by the Departments concerned here that British Security Coordination in New lork and Washington should take immediate steps either in conjunction with the appropriate U.S. authorities or otherwise to carry into effect the recommendations contained in.the Chiefs of Staff telegram.....   On -august 5th 1942 the Chiefs of Staff again cabled the Joint Staff Mission saying    The recommendations.have been approved by the . foreign Secretary and the Ministry of Economic War   fare.should now discuss this matter with the   D.S. authorities. Now SOE's report Axis Strength in Latin America had laid down certain basic rules applicable to all the strategic industries of Latin America which it suggested should be enforced by locally recruited men who had full knowledge of the particular industry involved and the dangers to which such industry was exposed. WS had then drawn up plans for a new   organization formed along these lines. He envisaged a scheme whereby   reliable men from the factories mines and refineries could be recruited   by BSC trained in security work and then returned to act as Security   Officers at their places of employment., , 25   of putting it into operation. The companies at his request willinglyagreed to release officials for training as Industrial Security Officers. It was only when arrangements were near completion -in December 1942 -that an agreement was reached whereby the FBI was designated the   responsible American agency. This tardy decision proved more embarrassing than helpful. For the FBI produced their own plan which they had drawn up without consulting BSC and it was found to provide for the protection of many British companies to which BSC had already appointed Security   Officers. Much negotiation was necessary before the FBI could be persuaded to modify it.   i Uj u  c ISOs IN OPERATION One or more representatives were chosen from each of the companies in Latin America which had been designated by BSC as being the producers of vital material. These men were flown up to the J3SC school in Canada where they were given an intensive two weeks' course of training in the basic principles of anti-sabotage. At the end of that period each wrote a thesis upsh the special security problems of his own firm. The problems raised therein were discussed with the head of the school then again with BSC In New York and the man was returned quickly to his post in the South a fully-fledged Industrial Security Officer ready and qualified to take up his new duties. ISOs served without pay but in order to concert measures of protection over v/ider areas and to keep the ISOs informed and enthusiastic a small number of full-time paid supervisors were appointed as Chief Industrial Security Officers CISOs each one covering a certain zone. For this purpose Latin America was d3.vided into six Security Zones, 26   Zone A Peru Bolivia and Northern Chile Zone B Brazil Zone C Colombia Venezuela and Ecuador Zone D British Guiana supervised by the Defence Security Officer Zone E Southern Chile Zone F Argentina Uruguay and Paraguay.   In each of these Zones the CISO travelled from point to point throughout the strategic areas urging local governments and officials to improve security making recommendations which the companies themselves could adopt after due discussion and maintaining liaison with American security officers where such existed. CISOS . also reported on other companies whose security was a matter of British interest but which were   not important enough to warrant the expense of training an official.   xhe first recruits entered the school in August 1942. a year later the work was complete. Six supervisory officers and sixty-one ISOs had been recruited appointed and trained of whom seventeen were railway   managers ten oilfield technicians two from oil storage plants seven officials of the frigorificos supplying Britain with frozen meat six representatives of merchant houses and five from power companies. Though   it cost a thousand dollars three-quarters of which was air passage to Miami to bring a recruit up for training and to return him to the field the loss of even a week's operation of any one of the enterprises con   cerned would have made this figure dwindle Into insignificance.   5 so under WS's direction the SOE had been primarily responsible for developing the scheme for it was originally believed that the scheme would provide excellent means for large-scale SOE penetration of   South America. But the Chiefs of Staff laid down the principle that it, 27   should be kept entirely separate from both SOE and SIS in order to reassure local governments and to avoid possible denunciations by the Americans. Its control was therefore transferred in October 1942 to the Security   Division of BSC. I'he head of the Security Division controlled the CSO   organization and now that he also had under him the ISOS he was able   to ensure that both organizations worked along parallel lines and in full   cooperation so that between them they could ensure the safety of all   ijU   valuable material at source of production and at the docks and upon the high seas. In November 1942 the ISO organization was officially recognized in a circular telegram from the Foreign Office to Chanceries in South America which stated that its functions were    to cover the security of war materials from the place   of production until safely shipped and to bring   within its scope the railway over which these materials   are carried to the port of embarkation and such power   and other utility services as are essential to their   transport or production.   That indeed was what the ISOs did. As they returned to their   posts and began to apply the lessons they had learned reports and   recommeddations began to flow into BSC. As early as August 1942 an ISO   visited the oilfields at Talara and suggested -inter alia -the installation   of night lighting the employment of more Anglo-Saxon watchmen and the   creation of an informant service. Progress reports and detailed   examinations of vulnerable areas increased from sixteen in November 1942   to eighty-nine in June 1943 and all of them helped to build up the, 28   the detailed security plan of each company and each area kept by the GISO for each Zone - s a by-product a considerable amount of political and general intelligence was passed to SIS and SOE in New York. Many   reports also went to the FBI and U.S. Army Intelligence and in return the FBI provided copies of certain South American surveys made by their own agents although it should be added there ware no reports on Americanowned enterprises. In several spheres of common interest such as the   balsa mills in Ecuador however security surveys were carried out by the   CISO and the FBI agent jointly.   The success of the scheme from the British point of view was complete. No major act of sabotage was successfully perpetrated by the enemy to hinder the flow of essential materia]Sat any time during the war despite the proved existence of a widespread and well-organized enemy sabotage ring. And though there were numerous accidents particularly as the rolling stock of the strategic railways began to wear out the vigilance of the ISOS made them far less frequent and serious than they might have been.   In fact a large part of the work of the ISO organization lay in preventing or remedying small stoppages and inefficiencies all of which would have held up material in its urgent passage to the sea. A typical example occurred in January 1944 when the Duperial ammonia factory in Buenos Sires broke down. Without ammonia the frigorificos could not freeze the beef waiting for transport to Britain. Through quick cooperation between the GISO in Buenos Aires the Security Bivision in New   York and the Security Executive in .London tubes of the chemical were sent out from Britain with top priority and thus a disastrous reduction of British rations was averted. x Indeed much of the ISOh/work may prove of more than transient, 29   worth. Latin America is likely to suffer from wars and revolutions for   decades to come and during such civil commotions there are always and inevitably attacks on foreign companies he safeguards which the ISOs instituted have already become routine and most of the ISOs are them selves still employed by the companies they were called upon to protect during the war., 30   CHAPTER III   THE SECURITY OF PERSONNEL   The Security Division of BSC safeguarded the material resources of Great Britain on the American continent. That work has been described. But there was another more subtle problem of security with which the Division had to deal the problem of preventing enemies and undesirables from infiltrating into positions where they might gain special knowledge of the British war effort he undesirables included employees who being weak garrulous of divided loyalty or in financial difficulty would become easy prey for an enemy agent remaining in the background.   Sound security in these matters involved the checking of countless individuals. Prior to Pearl Harbour it involved the checking of British and Canadian citizens applying for work in British missions as accountants clerks secretaries and guards American employees for these missions Allied personnel volunteering for service in the armed forces American citizens volunteering for the Eagle Squadrons and other sections of the RAF American citizens for the armed medical services or for the technical corps American defence workers going to British territory and employees of the O.S. commercial airlines who would be going abroad.   A few months after Pearl Harbour recruiting for the RAF which had been done through the Canadian Aviation Bureau ceased. But Pan- American Airways began to enlist many more recruits pilots air-crew and ground staff for overseas all of whom had to be carefully vetted. Then there were free-lance British lecturers or writers catering to the American public American employees of British-controlled war plants   American patent attorneys entrusted with seer t British information, 31   deserting seamen and suspect seamen.   In all cases the person s record was examined and judged in the light of his access to information or his opportunity to conunit sabotage. For example the Security Division during the second six   months of 1942 made 1 560 detailed personnel examinations for Washington 928 for the British Ministry of Supply Mission in New York and 1 348 for other enquires. In the same period they vetted 1 405 Allied service   personnel mostly Norwegian and Dutch 537 British volunteer civilians 237 technicians 723 recruits for three American airlilies and 194 for British Overseas Airways.   In practice these different types of investigation were allocated among different sections of Security Division. Gases of applicants for jobs in British missions in the D.S. were handled by a section which enjoyed close contact with the FBI and the police. Examinations we.e conducted in different ways according to the nature of the case sometimes through a special investigator sometimes through a   r  credit bueau or in cases of distant or foreign background the CSO or   A SIS representative was called upon. References were then taken up and those who had given them were asked for further information. The applicant's name was checked through the various New York regist ries the FBI subversive files and in some cases through the local police at the place of residence. The field reports together with information from those giving references were then closely compared with the claims made on the application form discrepancies and contradictions were re checked. Finally an assessment was made and the mission concerned was notified. Over 20 000 such investigations were carried out and though most of them concerned American citizens not one complaint was received., 32   The work had to be undertaken with considerable discretion and it was   greatly assisted by the devotion of the American employees engaged in   it.   An extension of personnel Security was the general Security of the British missions in the United States. Sooner or later tired from long hours the man busy on secret   plans leaves a document lying on his desk which catches the eye of an inquisitive cleaner. A messenger puts down his bag in a public place to buy a packet of cigarettes and turning finds it has vanished. Under   strain a man begins to drink too heavily and under the influence of   alcohol talks. AH such problems refers to the security of missions.   In principle of course this phase of security is an unpopular one since heads of missions naturally wish to retain full powers over their oYm departments. At first there was neither agreement that a single authority responsible for the security of missions was necessary nor if it were that such authority should properly be vested in BSC. I'he first step was taken in March 1942 however when representatives of the Embassy the Joint Staff Mission the Admiralty Delegation the Air Commission the Treasury the Supply Council and the Purchasing Commission as well as the Coordinator of Empire Requirements met to discuss a basic set of security regulations with a BSC representative.   The resulting British Security Manual was accepted by all departments concerned.   The next stage was to have these basic rules enforced. In June 1942 the head of the British Army Staff ih Washington expressed his alarm at the laxity which still persisted suggesting that all   security arrangements should be coordinated under one officer directly, 33  responsible to the Embassy. The head of the Security Division saw representatives of the various British delegations and missions once more in July 1942 and got them to agree that guards and safe-hand messengers should be controlled by BSG. An experienced Chief Security Officer was appointed and he made a tour of British-occupied buildings in Washington and submitted a report on them. This showed that elementary   being rules were being neglected important papers were/left unattended in unguarded rooms and mere boys were being employed to carry sacks of safe-hand mail containing highly confidential documents. BSC's investigators found a similar situation in several New York offices and contrasted it with the strong security prevailing in American buildings occupied by the FBI the Navy and the Joint Staff. A number of urgent recommendations were eventually accepted by representatives of the various missions in Washington and BSC took over control of their guards and physical security from September 1st 1942. During the ensuing months similar reforms were instituted in the British missions in New York. BSC employed a corps of 74 guhrds in New York 26 in Detroit and 220 in Washington as well as receptionists and messengers. Each month approximately 56 000 pounds of confidential waste were burned under the supervision of these guards. All the while the situat on was watched and a regular monthly survey of security errors was compiled and circulated amongst the missions in order to remind their staffs of the need for constant vigilance. BSC did not however have jurisdiction over the distribution of secret telegrams minutes and reports within British missions and it was felt thdt this created a certain risk of leakage. Civil servants are not all security minded. Also Washington presented a peculiar problem   in that the personnel of many missions had become largely Americanized., 34   American advisers had been appointed American girls were taken on as secretaries and staff members married American citizens.   One serious example of the result of this situation may be worth noting in detail. On July 25th 1944 the columnist Drew Pearson published part of a confidential report to President Roosevelt on India by the former U.S. Ambassador to New Delhi William Phillips see Part V . By August 10th BSG's own informants in Washington had learned that   Pearson had obtained the report from an anti-British Indian agitator connected with the India League of America. Pearson already had contacts with the League. So far although grave th's affair did not concern   the security of British missions. But on August 28th Pearson printed a   report that the Foreign Office had asked for Phillips' recall from London   and he quoted almost verbatim several telegrams from Whitehall to the Embassy. This was taken up by Senator Chandler in the Senate and with even more energy by Representative Calvin Johnson in the Lower House. Chandler also made public the text of a cable from the Department of External Affairs   in New Delhi to the India office.   After the Embassy's own Security Officer had attempted without   success to trace the leakagejBSC was called upon for assistance. An   investigation was carried out and within two days a full report was   submitted by WS to Sir Ronald Campbell in Lord Halifax's absence. The report told that the leakages were emanating from the Indian Agency General in Washingtoh where at least one Indian Nationalist sympathizer   was being employed in an important position. Names were given and recommendations were made. It was emphasized that both civilian and military security were in jeopardy and that action should be taken immediately. Enquiries were then instituted regarding the security of telegrams, 35   and documents in the Washington missions and in the Embassy itself and in result WS submitted a short report to the Ambassador which indicated considerable inefficiency and danger of leakage. Lord Halifax at once requested WS to report fully upon the situation and to submit specific recommendations for safeguarding confidential communications both within   the Chancery and Embassy and in each separate Mission.   This was done and the final report revealed a most unsatisfactory state of affairs. American citizens were being employed as assistants and secretaries in positions where they could read cables on post-war subjects which were specifically prefixed 'GUARD' Not to be shown to the Americans . One of these American employees a secretary was the wife of an FBI official another had a husband in the War Department. Foreign Office telegrams which should have been circulated only to thirty people were available to sixty persons or more the keys of safe-hand boxes were being carelessly handled and in one instance they were in   the Custody of an American secretary. After the Ambassador had received the report he summoned the heads of all the British missions in Washington to a meeting and discussed the situation with them. Thereafter he requested WS to appoint a BSG officer to assist the mission heads in putting into effect the recom mendations contained in it. chief representative of the Security Division in Washington undertook this duty and under his guidance adequate measures were enforced against security breaches. The Security Division had also to deal with deserters from British and Allied merchant vessels the intensity of the campaign and the long ordeal of the Merchant Navy inevitably resulted in desertions on a con siderable scale. There was the additional temptation of high wages in, 36   American war factories ashore for the owners of these were only too glad to get labour with few questions asked. 1'hrough 1944j nearly 100 British seamen a week continued to desert their vessels in United States ports. Desertion of Chinese seamen with their closely organized communities ashore provided a particularly difficult problem.   Although the U.S. Immigration authorities were at one period of the war reluctant to take appropriate action against deserters because of the acute labour shortage in the port areas they were eventually persuaded to do so by the argument that one of the easiest ways for a saboteur or agent to secure entry into the United Kingdom or the British Merchant Fleet was by getting himself picked up as a deserting British seaman. Accordingly they agreed to enable BSC to vet all deserters before they were returned to their ships or deported home. Further under the American ruling which permitted deportation of deserters to countries adjacent to their own if their own countries were enemy occupied the U.S. authorities facilitated a scheme which resulted in the deportation of Greeks and Yugoslavs to the Middle East and of Chinese to India where in many instances they were drafted into the Allied Armed Forces., 37   CHAPTER IV SECURITY IN THE FINAL PHASE   As the Allied position improved the threat of sudden emergencies with which the Security Division might have to deal receded. For example the North African campaign of 1942 removed the danger of direct German assault on Brazil and the growth of U.S. Naval power in the Pacific eliminated the possibility of Japanese raids on the Panama Canal or oh oil installations in Peru. By 1943 the responsibility of the Security Division was largely a matter of applying measures previously dev'sed and tested. But it was by no means simple to discharge. Provision of security in the United States with the exception of the work of the CSOs had after much change and experiment been placed in American hands. It would be perhaps more accurate to say in many American hands for the agencies responsible included the FBI the Office of Naval Intelligence the Coast Guard the   y.S. Army G-2 the Provost-Marshall General's Office and the Immigration authorities. These various agencies divided the duties Wtmfen themselves in a manner which was so confused that there was constant likelihood of inter-organizational disputes. Thus BSC's liaison with the Americans on security matters which had once amounted to no more than unofficial contacts with a handful of friendly individuals now resembled the conduct of a highly intricate telephone exchange in which the operator has tcj know the exact interest and mutual relations of all subscribers and must riever make a wrong connection. In addition   to the many official liaisons with the headquarters of U.S. and Canadian agencies in Washington New York and Ottawa there existed innumerable local liaisons between CSOs and the officials of the interested American, 38   services in their respective ports. Consequently the work though unspectacular was considerably intricate. As 1943 passed into 1944 the work of the Security division was concentrated on assisting the extraordinary precautions which had to   be taken to safeguard the forthcoming invasion. L he smallest risk of the enemy securing forewarning of any detail of the Allied plan could not be afforded nor could so little as a day's delay in the sailing of a ship carrying men and supplies to the United Kingdom.   In nearly every British mission there was a senior Administrative Officer who had in his possession a fragment of vital information which would have contributed valuably to the mosaic which the enemy was endeavouring to piece together. To meet the special circumstances the War Office made security recommendations of exceptional severity to British Civil MissiorS and BSC's Chief Security Officer in Washington helped to implement these. Regulations governing the carriage of secret documents by British officials within the U.S. were once again reviewed safety plug-in telephones were installed in the offices of senior executives a committee was formed to coordinate practice in handling classified documents-and the various British courier systems were thoroughly checked and consequently improved.   Towards the end of March Security Service. in the U.K. began to note an increasing number of alien seamen on American-controlled ships. These were seamen who had recently emerged from Axis-occupied territory in the Mediterranean but had nevertheless been allowed to pass through a U.S. port without any effective security vetting. Investigation by BSC revealed many loopholes in the American system whereby enemy agents might well make their way on to United States ships in Mediterranean   ports and without difficulty obtain seamen's documents in the U.S. They, 39   could then sail freely to the O.K. Urgent pleas to the Americans for remedial action brought no improvement for no less than eight separate   U.S. agencies each endowed with conflicting and overlapping authority were involved. t'our flagrant and different cases were submitted to ONI who replied that these were not under naval jurisdiction and suggested an appeal to a higher authority. I'he situation was then brought to the notice of the British Joint Staff Mission who in turn laid it before the Combined Chiefs of Staff.   As a result the U. . Chiefs of Staff clarified the functions of the eight agencies involved. 'I'hey instructed the Coast Guard to cease issuing to alien seamen documents which would enable them to sail without interrogation. Those already in possession of documents were to be inter rogated forthwith. These measures were regarded as adequate on both sides of the Atlantic and it is gratifying to record that subsequently the U.S. Coast Guard at the Security Davison's suggestion invited an experienced   U.K. Security Control Officer to visit the United States for the purpose of instructing them in British methods of seamen's interrogation and port control. The pre-invasion travel ban on the movement of Allied service personnel from the Western Hemisphere to the U.K. was imposed barely a month before D-Day. The application of the ban was carried out by the appropriate section of Security Division with much expedition. All Allied military missions in the U.S. and Canada were informed at once. Special visits were paid to Washington Montreal and Ottawa to check arrangements and a satisfactory test case was conveniently provided by a certain French officer who approached both British and American authorities, 40   in the United States to obtain passage to the U.K. Being unsuccessful he endeavoured to obtain first sea and then air transport from Canada only to find himself in each case referred back to Security Division.   D-Day came and went and with it the work of the Security Division began to decrease. But so long as the war in Europe lasted so long as there was the smallest chance of a sudden reversal in Allied fortune it was essential and could not be abandoned. Indeed one new security plan which had world wide implication was put into effect after the invasion.   The Security Division had always maintained close working relations with relevant British agencies in the United States. It worked for example with the Ministry of War Transport in regard to shipping with the War Trade Department of the Embassy on contraband and with NID18 on naval intelligence affairs. It had maintained liaison too with the ROMP DNI Canadian Military Intelligence and the Department of External Affairs in Ottawa. Now it began to develop liaison with security authorities in other parts of the Empire and in June 1944 direct communication was established with the Australian Commonwealth Security Service at Canberra with the Director of Security Intelligence in New Zealand and with the South African Security authorities. In each case the object was to coordinate the protection of British Australian and New Zealand ships plying between the Americas and the Antipodes at both ends of their voyage and to narrow the watch on suspect seamen and troublesome crews who formerly disappeared from view in faraway waters.   This expanding field of inter-communication began to give a new significance to the system of Security Coordinatioh Ship Inspection 'd the Reports by which eadh vessel visited carried on a sealed copy ol/CSO's, 41   report to the Security Officer at the next British-controlled port of call. A brief explanation of the scheme was circulated to British Security Officers all over the world. Security Service links throughout Africa and the Mediterranean became familiar with the system and in Australia and New Zealand it was arranged that receiving officers should reseal and return such reports after adding their own comments. The system thus provided the nucleus of a progressive security check on individual ships and seamen from port to port throughout British-controlled territory.   The Security Division was finally disbanded after V-J Day when its work was done. It had been given the wartime task of guarding from sabotage all British interests of strategic importance in the Western Hemi sphere. Among these there was British-controlled shipping in American ports and there were the vast stores of war materials in manufacture in the U.S. factories there were the oilfields in Venezuela and Peru supplying the bulk of the needs of the Navy and the RAF and there were the bauxite mines of the Guianas there were the wheat and the meat from the Argentine the tin from Bolivia the balsa wood for Mosquito bombers from Ecuador the copper from Chile the platinum and iron ore from Brazil.   There can be no doubt that the Security Division succeeded in its purpose. The record shows that the total enemy sabotage score against British property throughout the whole American Qontinent apart from a number of insignificant interferences with industrial undertakings which may or may not have been inspired by Berlin amounted to no more than six vessels damaged. None was sunk.]