.(1372) 46008 33lfe/D5077 ZOOM. 10/45 SP/TBH Gp.38 J.8449
NO MINUTES TO BE WRITTEN ON THIS JACKET
* BRANCH MEMORANDA (B.M.) COVER
vk

a	jpjBi
Unregistered	I ^
Reference Number of
Originating Branch.
6M/h-ol/s'
A.<U. vM
Subject.
1
FLOSS£Mf5unCr -
NOTES ON THE USE OF BRANCH MEMORANDA.
(See paragraphs 160—166 Office Instructions, 1943)
1.	The existence and movement of a B.M., unlike those of a registered file, are NOT recorded
by Registry.
2.	B.Ms. may ONLY be used as
(a)	ENCLOSURE B.Ms.—For action on letters or other important papers when the appro-
priate registered file is not available. When it is essential for a branch to obtain
quickly the views of a number of other branches, and these branches are not likely
to need to refer to the file in order to formulate their views, it is often appropriate
to send “ Enclosure B.Ms.” simultaneously to each such branch. Enclosure B.Ms.,
or the substance of them, must be enclosed in the registered file at the first opportunity.
(b)	INTERNAL DISCUSSION B.Ms.—For “ domestic ” records or discussions within a
directorate, etc. ; or for other preliminary soundings on any questions which may or
may not at a later stage require a registered file.
(c)	COVERS FOR UNIMPORTANT LETTERS, ETC.—B.M. covers may be used when a
jacket is essential for unregistered correspondence unlikely to involve much inter-
branch discussion.
3.	If a B.M. has, or acquires, any general importance, the branch concerned should link the
B.M. to a registered file at the earhest possible moment in one of the following ways
(а)	By sending the complete B.M. to be registered and thus raised to the status of a registered
file ;
(б)	By transferring the B.M. as an enclosure to a registered file.
4.	The branch originating a B.M. must be informed, if the B.M. is registered, or inserted in
a registered file, by another branch.
Referred to
Date
Referred to
Date
Referred to
Date﻿

' •« f I
*>, *] t C(
// 2jccn(j
Pj^Xo fif
?} 2 !*f ^ 03
?)vrx4is-
^ j 2l y i o i{ \
%' 00 i v
Pj xurqi*
J-Hr
i(^^'Trv
“j. / rJ/ti Pi
t J, QaiPHi FTf
4. W' H	^
T. 'h£»\l>ti?i tuy v
2). ■'••
R. Ibfcvoue^ <
MM QtHtiA*i,
If. h- L £ </'/■ rtii
------﻿﻿﻿Tel. No.: Abbey 613l'
Any further communication on this
subject shpuld be Addressed to:—
A. 0,3. (V/W.)
The War Office, M.0.1.(S.P. ),
Whitehall,
Nq1/*'c’ Data '/} .
London, S.W.l.
HEP/2018
To : Lt. Ool. V.A.R. Isham,
A.G.3* (vw).
25th June, 1945.
Copy : Office of the Judge Advocate General,
Military Department (Attn. Capt. Buckley).
Under reference G]/Br/l5l66/A-3	10 Jun 45 we
have received from Allied Force Headquarters copies of
statements from 19 ex-internees who were evacuated to
Capri. We are informed that you and the J.A.G.’s Dept,
also"received copies of these statements. Many of these
internees had come from Flossenburg.
Capt. Buckley recently, asked me if this Department
had any Officers who had been in Flossenburg at the same
/ time as Lieut. AMPHLETTj who had met his death there.
Amphlett was empToyecTlDy us.
Four Danish Officers named :
M.J.
1/
MIKKELSEN,
A.T. LAESEN, ^ y
PEDERSEN, '
K.E.
H.F.
HANSEN, c/
.0.1. (S.P.) who wease ^
were the only Officers employed by
known to have been at Flossenburg at this time and who are
still alive. These Danes are in Denmark and are not
expected to return to the U.K. for several weeks.
P.rp.﻿It is considered that the statement by J.L.E.
MOGENSEN describes fully the events of 29 March 45, when
our Officers are known to have been killed and, therefore,
, that this statement may for the moment serve the purpose
required by Capt, Buckley. The first paragraph of page
3 of Capt. H. LUNDIMl deals with the same iriotant♦
There is also a statement by J. MEELER, a Munich lawyer,
in which we think Mr. Clyde may be interested, especially
in the fifth paragraph of page 2 and the last paragraph
of page 4.﻿Tel. nV : Abtey *al31
V


NQ.Si,l 0ata.
The War Office, M.0.1.(S.P. )>
Whitehall,
London, S.W.l.
Any further communication on this
subject should be addressed to:—
HEP/2047
To : Lt. Col. V.A.R, Isham.
A.G.3.(vw).
30th June, 194-5
June
Copy l r^-P-Pn r\-P +:V»c» TnrirfO &rhrr\/^c»+«=» rLc»r-iov»c> 1

I refer to the statements made by J.L.E
MOGEESEN and Hans LUNDIHC concerning the British
agents who were said to have been killed at Flosseriberg
on 29 Mar 45»
We are reasonably certain that their
identities are as follows :
1.	.A/Capt. RAFFERTY, Brian Dominic (p/12964-) - R. Berks Rgt.
Cell No. 31 moved to cell No. 9.
2.	Lieut. AMPS, James Frederick (p/241288) - Gen. List.
Cell No. 29 moved to cell No. 11.
3.	Lieut. AMFHLETT, Philip John (P/270979) - Gen. List.
Cell No. 11.
4.	Lieut. DEMAND, Georges William Hedworth (P/250965) -
Cell No. 15.	Gen. List.
5.	Lieut. SOSKICE, Victor, who was an Officer of the U.S.
Forces. His full particulars can be obtained
from the Office of Strategic Services, 72
Grosvenor Street.
Cell No. 33 moved to cell No. 13.
over/﻿1
gt/.
6.	Sjt. GRAEAlsl, Harry Huntingdon (Army No. 800964) - R.A.
Cell No. 9.
7.	F/O, AG-AZARIAN, Jack Charles Stanmore," (RAFVR) No. 71106.
attached A.1.10, A*K Ministry.
Cell 25 moved to cell No. 17.
8.	Lieut. DS VERIEIK, Jean (p/260903) - Gen. List.
Cell No. 1.
9-. Maj. BIELER, Gustave Daniel Alfred - Canadian Forces.
Cell No. 23.
'OLO. Lieut. SIBHEE, David (p/282425) - Gen. List.
Cell No. 17.
11.	Lieut. DOWLEN, Roland (P/241045) - Gen. List.
There are two other Officer of whose identity we
are not absolutely certain, but we believe that the informa-
tion given below may be accurate :	^
12.	Lieut. LSVENE, Eugene Francis (p/235918) - R.A.
Cell No. 5.
13.	Lieut. MENZIES, James Francis George (P/183054) - Gen. List.
We are not able to identify two "other British
Officers mentioned, viz. HENET, cell No. 15 and MICHEL in
cell No. 17.
The majority of these Officers were commissioned
in the Secret List and their names, therefore, do not
necessarily appear in the Army List.
k/~M-
Squgdrofi Leader﻿v* 4uyt:	v/\'.
<t7f>
k
4
■ ui&jaetr- IV1	OCilJ- .i .	•	....-;1.
••' ° S*	:l.-tpr:iuUaP.
1, Iferwsltti a letter m&o&m ■ tzrme. taw,-ms- to a la^r.cieest
at& aaw>g»|w» aa-#^! md» In .-tsm;:/axrg in ; .taia r, 1943#
to t4e	c ':ta.n ,&«ro-tir* Ir-Si s i : tifc-ir o rfe*
2#	Jf it is ;o;; VAo to ismMty tixs oftioor ia qwatioo* 7®*
erO'	i<.-nc,o no "-..otif*/ .n.:;.:: of
k
/
4
MQtri4-.vfci.3Q
j.a.G, (with ori iv->al let- cr*)
33﻿f 1? A H S L A ? I 0 TI,
%
;:traBbaurc 16 yer)t, ]$L%
g Qsnnviere F£K,
C/o ! :ie
Ira asoo tie la ;»»« 1,
traob^ugg.
To Ca.,t. :aI3.tglna»
Barglvo lao, nir9 for the .’elay in ocmeUnc you fchl© inforaation.	Bat not
boins an Alsatian^ I did not know 'shore and to vixm to send It. I mat
apologise too for having forgottm fee ‘greater part of it, as after the events
below I becaoe aerioasly ill vAth t7j.ims*
I was a politioal deportee on daring fee Inst stages of fee v/nr I v.Tta interned
in the oamp at ZTtfOlXAU vMeh depended on the enrap for wm at FLft	in
(JSaCJBOT-MVMIA, I xma found guilty of eaaplicity in the blowing of a goods
to£Pq loaded wife hcrabe esigineoree Tjr aov-. al of Egr oajap raatec, and. tnas osidocanotl
to solltaxy ooufineoent. Star the oariying out of this sentence 1 ton sent to Si©
frightful ,rlson in the can® at FOX JIHJIS - feie havjpcaKsd in October 194k but
there eas an air raid on fee oanp, and fee prison ty a lairaole was not iiit though
there were several very vd.de 0$wt& in fee walls n; iich ore <pii<&:2y rap*ired* As .
I was fee only ewsan in file iirison, the warders who had received dei’init© orders to
ualtro.-'t me, wore for apparent reason quit© ’•oaod'* to roe.
As a. result 1 was able to keep fee bod clothes on cy bed which enabled so to
hide a fairly lorn® crack liiti-len wder say hod, and sy neirtf iOurs bed was stretched
along fee lengtii erf* fee wall on fee other aide, thus hi ling it ccEiplutety. I
could, therefore, ©onrunioate with sy neighbour, m m life Officer, who ©poke fluent
French - he was amiting a oenteno© of deafe to be carried out and gave roe Ms name
and his address. Alas, I can no longer remenher more than his Christian naroe*
mrr.T s and his naa© which I can’t rsmfesr or guarente© to be oscactt- 2ll(?)$ZST
(or (?) AWflsSHQ, His odk'jressr- B-rtioan (?), national Club of Lmdon. Com.-ndor
of a grou’. of pomfeatista wontcing in the OL	D area. Ho had boon
denounced and arrested, as well as -{lie 10 or 33 of bin group than he *© boarding a
train at a station whose nose I forgot, I don’t rmeosber ho® they ofc to vs© ersip.
T?:se reason for which they were awaiting a slow bata wes as fol .owes- Thoao 11
or 14 nwi ere shut up, one to a cell, all in a row - esacutioners st.-i-tod Wife
Be. i (uy noifh^Jur‘s“, the le-der , wife ;Tg, 14 os ‘die last to be c at wife. -soy
started by torturing 'o» 1, leoding to a slow ;eafe at fee end of .hroe vjofes.
hen they bed killed tills nnrtyr, they aru-sounced it to all ids ©osrsdes as well a©
fee fact that they wore starting on the socond, and bo oa. All knew thejaselvos
to be ■; undesiEied. Zxeytxm counted fee days — all nufferoC iTosa lasgcr, ana feirst,
anl cold, end from lack of jqvjb of fee ©utside w.rld, But not erne rsiead a .xsxza?
ay loot his ooile. i teeV'-r, from fee nows feat did roafe '.no ' a.~ip, and from t «
o'Wioas look of 3cy on tbo wonder faces and fee diminishing ferocity of their
treatment. It was easy to guess that events of great conso- uence were oa«rr.ing at
feit tirao. 1 did in fact, raanago to tell ay neirhbeur of fee possibility of fee
Ail inn reeching fee caro in fee near future and stir up some lope. Ut ile enough,,
alas, for life at tot tine. 2hsrkt to a code lawsn onJy to feanselvcs, they
couM by irregular taps of tteir kmehlcc on the ’• 11s oamuunioftto tills notvs from
on© to fee other. I tian’t know if fees© jam, w oso coum; u m-is so eawvlnry
and fej in spite of oil feoir cruel sofferiago hid their feelings from their
executioners, who are still alive. Their death was alpoat cert' inly lairried xu
I dont know if this inforsaation ooncoms fee group of parachutists tsfeom you
sent ion in fee newspapar of fee 10 cupterober. But I would like to express fee
hoz® feat such inforraatdon as 1 have been, able to give you, little onouji, also -
will enable you to identity then. SMs ofticer begged me to pass on fee message
to all ay fellow traaen eacilos hoping feat if one came out olive site could pass it
on. But, alas, 1 was struck dosm with typhus and feen dysentry in to t very coll,
and was carted off to the ©enp ina’imAry, There X wua unable to oocsunicatc ' ife
ary of ay friends,
Idboration followed ox>n after. Her© is fee laoscage wife vAdch he entrusted
os -- ’’To tell hie superior officers in fee • lub of their torture and fate - w»t
all were determined to die bravely and rdiaiout flinching, and I was to id a
aeaoige of affection for their families'1.﻿﻿Reference reverse.
I return herewith letter from Mile. Devie relating to the
Flosseriburg Concentration Camp. I have n,o .accused registered in
respect of this camp, nor in fact aij I aware of any of the names, for
this camp is in the Russian zone and I understand that the Russians are
anxious to try the camp staff of concentration camps in their zone.
Mile. Devie does not give any detailed information as to the^
conditions in the camp and from her letter X would imagine that she was
not capable of. doing so at the present
Mil. Dept. ,
JAG's Branch.,
IHItehall 7936 2xt.6,
25 Oct 45-
RCH/AJF.
Colonel,
for Military’ Deputy,
’ ' J.A.G.﻿Minute Sheet No.
Register No. B.M. 402/8 A. Cr. 3 • v/w.
SubjectFLOSSEI^BURq OCWGMrJRi\JIOM CMSP	' ‘
T°Distribution.
4
1.	Herewith a letter received among answers to a broadcast
and newspaper appeal made in Strasbourg in September, 1945,
to help the S.A.S. 'War Crimes -Investigation Team in their work.
2.	If it is possible to identify the officer in question, you
are asked please to notify this office.
Distribution
J.A.G. (vri-th original letter)
Cas. P,W»
HO.I. (SP)
Hq. S.A.S. Troops.
Air. 2.

OCT 1945
l
*
(4964) VVt. 42053/5462 200m. 11/44 C.&Co. 745(8) J.7022
P.T. OVER.﻿
<AvJLG^ V^&JUt
<^o qK**JLkV
» 1 *
^	G-^-V^v .
4L.4
'C^vrc—.
J . i? f)﻿. L A TIP 21.
itwuBbourE 10 sopt* 39U%
ttlle Gcneviere D.,V1;,
O/o ims lutndi,
Baposse de la uno X,
Strasbourg
go Ga,;<t« Galltaiaa*
. op; ive me, ; Ir, for tlia	in oontlins you this infopciation* Bat not
being an Alsatian, I Sid not law? xtogro and. to tshoo to send it. I oust apologia*
too fop having forgotten line rsator port of it, as oftei* the events Ixilon I
b&oam seriously ill witli tyrima.
I ms a political deportee and .‘iuring the last stt’ges of the .var I -.ms intemed
in tlie amp at ZKrOEUV niiiich depended on Sis comp for oen at FW .21W G in
CBJCnOBIOTAKIA* X ms found gsUty of coE^licity in the blooing up of a goods
'0B0W lotided tTith bouibs ceighoeerod by seveidl of oy cimp nates, and ms exsodasned to
solitary oonfinaraent. Pop the oorrylng out of fcis aentonee I ms sent to the
fri{*itful prison in the coop at Flfl- krHffilG - thie hm^emd to October 19.’b> but
theitJ ms on air raid on the oesap, and tho .ristm ’tgr ft odroole was not hit though
there were s©vei*nl vary wide cracks in the vails which vrare quickly rurjaired. to
I	was the only woman in the prison, the warders who had received definite orders to
mitre? t tae, vrare for no ftgpmmt reason quite ’’gcoa?* to me.
As a result I ms able to keep the bed clothes on ay bod which enabled roe to hide
a fairly large crack hit err under oy bed, and ay nei^fxjure bed ms stretched along
the lengtli of tlic xmll on the other side, thus Itkltog it comictc^.	X could,
therefore, csosaamioate with ay noighbour, on toglixh Officer, niio spoke fluent
2*mch - lie me 'awaitin'! a sentence of death to be carried out and g vq it© his ittzaa
and his Oiliross. Ale®, I can no longer raagsber oore ®am Ms Christian .ncae:
PiSUT*?, and Ills name viiich. I can’t reoanbor or •'mrantoe to e emetr* AHX(v)ill;(or
'TfT^^T) •	.. is atldressr* artisan (?), national dub of London, OomSnsFcf a
toit) of paractattists vorkins: to the SlIMWI? FUMUM) kxxm. He hod l»en denounoed
and arrested, as well os tho 30 or U^O^ Mi ryour/rhon & ms boarding, a
statical tiiooe neno I forget, I don’t macaber hasr toey got to tte camp.
2h© raoecai for which tlnsy were awaiting a slot? death ms os follows Iheae
II	or 14 non were shut up, me to a cell, all .in a row - She oauimtionerc started
with Ho* 1 (cy neighbour’s, the leafor), with : . 24 as the last- to be dealt with*
They started, by torturing do, 1, loading to a slow death at the end of threo 'sro- s.
hen they hod killed Mils martyr, they aanounoed it to all Ills oewarados as veil as
tho. fact hat they were storting oa the second, m so on. All know thmeelves
to%e^ condameC, atoatyman oouitod the d^re • ell suffered from hunger, and thirst,
and cold, and from lack of news of toe outside world. But not on© mioo.f p ntmxur
or lost his srnilo, 'tOBOVcr, fr®a Uw news tlmt did reach the oem, and from tlie
obvious look of 3cy on tiie wander faces and tJ® tliminiaiiing ferocity of their
trentno :fc, it was easy to mess that events of great consequonce were oo mrinr at
that time. I did in fact, manage to tell ny noi;iibour of t»to .oasibility of toe
Allies reaching toe carap in the near future and stir up some hope, little enougi,
alas, for life at that tire. vhftsico to a code kmm only to tomaoelvec, they
oo:.ild by irrogiC^r t a of their lomckleo on toe wills oc#sr&i icato thir. robs from ore
to toe otoer* ' X teit know if toes® am, vhose courage was so oaemplary and vho to
spite of all their cruel sufferings hid their feelings from their eaasoutiomu? , who
are still alive, Their death ties a3s»ct oertais^y Iswrlod oa.
X dont know if tills inforaation oonscpne the group of paraohutists riiom you
mention in toe newspaper of toe 13 b:optaabep. But I would like to express the hono
that such tofatRnatlan as I have been able to give you, little onou^x, alas - will’
enable you to identify then, This officer beg ed no to pass on to© me. . a; g to all
ay fellow women exiles honing that if one oano out alive she could p-.ioo it on. But,
alas, I was struck down with typtus anc. tom tyixmtxy in toafc vesy cell, . ...d me
carted, off to fcl® coop influinaacy, there I wan unable to oaaaunioat© wit ony of r.y
friends.
iberation folio od soon after, faro is too asseege r.-ito tsdiioh he ontruotc l nor*
"To toll his superior offioers to the club of their torture and fete - that all r/ere
determined ,.o die Tpavoly on without fltotMng, and 1 ms to add a mas;: ago of
affection for their f^.-dlics",
is?/﻿"ir, I have done ay iluty a <1 hold q^Belf at your entire dlsrgosltlm
in case you vdoh to hear ny story,
Wsy 1 o^a-eoD ny cmtitKlSto, Sir, for the speed with tahioh you mift
your Allies hrouriit us hel;>
I'tovio, CrQnoviere, I'llo. 29219
from Sivodm Cos#?, (Flossenlsxrj;;).

,﻿A 6.3.- (v'/W.jf ■	^ ^
29th October, 1945»
Subject : -	ELOSSE7^]BURG CONCENTRATION GAMP.
Reference your B.M. !f02/8.A.G. 3* v/w of
23 Oct l£, it is considered that Mile. Geneviere DSVIE’s
letter probably refers to V/21Q313 Lt. P.J. AMRiLETT,
General List. We would also point out that other informa-
tion in Mile. Devie's letter is incorrect. We know from
other sources that all the British Officers were execueted
between 7 and 10.05 a.m. on the morning of 29 Mar 45 and
not killed off gradually as is suggested.
The remarks as to their exemplary courage
in spite of their severe sufferings, and their uncompromising
attitude towards their jailors, bears out what we have already
heard from other sources.
We are passing on to Lieut. Ainphlett's father
the message contained in the final para, of page one of the
report.
•	HEP/447 2
4® 7 <■
T% LV*
'7
Distribution :
S/Ldr.
A.G.3.(v.w.).
J • A. G-.﻿2 , f.vpwre
*! » «
e '»	■	»	138
,: co:*,*-	'; < l , •. •' ■ izmica.'.$>'- tl 'ii ;
’ *	*	^v.
.	O:,':.l	' U'^lay - l»	.
t
2or Grttase n£j. Iiist JiAtism, sarosiutS&t® te t .q .	. -
..tr' '■&] ',o /'.-I
, • ,
, ...
G-.	'i$*
3. o ra ' '-o	‘ au'1.' - >.' Ilo U;vio, If
CO, it ir m antct fmi J<X2 r\. 'aor:?; ■	>a'’ Var.r-rr<ii
ui a^rt -q tfln.﻿0 J - Y
v-
P
15.0.1 (. . P.)
Tile v'h.r Office,
Whifedmll,
HKDO?*, ' .-'.X,
Plt./0. V, r’. -ASKUIS,	7th I!ov«saS>er, 1945.
Itesr Colonel iGiiara.
' e are anxious to trace the present viiereabouts or to
knere; the ul'-liuate fate of a tiUErocr of cxir agents. It is thou$it
probable that sotae of the ' ar GriEd.na.ls now mler arrest tmy be able
to give isjortant information and you. keen kindly offered yaasp
oo-opemtion in this mtter.
I therefore now attach a short reatsae on Mia oainoe of
MfETTOOCK, SJDBBH®ADS^ and	shoeing the agents kora® to
have been detained there and intdeating the parsons \0aom. m xfltih to
have questioned.
I sliould be dad to -•.apply to you. any additional
inf enaction rahioI\ you rsay r-etjaire in comeetion with tbese enwiirleB.
Yours Biaoarely,
(Signed) 7. Atkim.
Lt. Colonel 7. A. Iclasi,
A.C-.3 (W) Yar Criirios,
20 a bon Stjacre,
f; ?>:> l
’Oe «﻿ffU&aMiBKm; (near W-limi)
1.	we know that a convoy of 15 British officers arrived in this
camp on 9th Apr il 1944. 'X’hey were placed in solitary confinement. There
is separate from the oatap a prison containing 40 cells of widch X attach
a sketch. They were put into the cells with uneven numbers; 1#3»5»?#9»
11*13,15,17* on the one side of the building and; 23,25,27,29,31,33 on the
other side of the building.
2.	In the lute gu^uer or early Autu, n of 1944 the inmate 9& cell
number 15, described as a young British sub-iiui tenant, was re..eved from
his cell. He was either executed or sent to another oamp, I have no elue
(whatever to his identity. Major PYFFK tells m that his name was found on
jthe door of the cell and sent to London, presumably to the War Room. It is
(obviously of the greatest importance that we should get this naiae without
further delay.
3.	Msjar BIBLdH, a Canadian officer, was
He is known to have been shot at the beginning o£'
confined in ceil number 23.
September 1944 with a
special Guard of honour consisting of 12 Si guards. I sue aid litce, if
We
ssible, to cnov the exact date at' this ,.ex.e.cufeioa»
4„	On 6th February, 1945 our officers confined in ceils number 25,
27,29,31 and 33 were moved to the otter side of the building. On 29th larch,
1945 the 13 remaining officers were executed by hanging.
5.	This is tne nominal roll of the 15 officers who arrived on
9th April, 1945 and the cells in widen they were data, odj
Ceil o*
Cell No*
\j 11 No.
Coil ilO.
Ce -1 no.
Cell ho.
Ceil no.
11 .
13.
15.
17.
23.
25.
27.
29.
31.
33.
JjJ
44, le ter
Cell No.	1.	Lt.	,U44>
Ceil no.	3.	Lt.	BOLCnil
cell ijO.	/.	-jt•	RO.i
Ceii No.	9.	Lt.	o.	1	in	toi"	C^Sptain f■ - j - ■ >- ■
0811 ho. 11 * Lt.	a ter Lt. 4.0.,,
Ceix 3.0. 13. Lt*
Cell Ho* 15. Unidentified sub-1tr^reuoved June/3ept.
;.j t• ij - .allL and n t. ijOuHCi*.
Lt. ■oimt. later f/c. AOA .AHIAR
major BibLLd, shot early iiept. 44.
Lt. DdlANB, later joved tto ce_l no. 15.
Lt* LoSLiC... . 9... Of, c.o. a., later x>ved to
cell no, 15.
Lt* J.t>, later moved to ceil no. 1 i.
Capt. TUFF'nTY, later moved t cell no. 9.
r/v.-» :j.... j... . j., latest’ uyoved to cci-i no. 17.
6.	..e ttherefore requLce additional _rfor'sation on the occupant of
cell number 5 wte may have been Lt. LHViiNS, and on the unid- ntified officer
detained in cexl number 15 who was executed in the late Summer of 1944. I
understand that a name 'was found on the door of cell number 15 and that this
nsuae was sent to juosadon. The door has now besi) broken down and I do not kner •
to vrtiotu in London this information was sent.
/.	ir*	, Gaptain LiiifD.BHx anu ..A. : i1 >1 nave iiunded in full
. reports giving names of the camp officials. If any of these have been
apprehended, and particularly camp co. mianaant KGCB, questions concerning the
murder of the British officers should be put to thea. I should, also like
to be ;mi‘or.iied of their ultimate fate as the next-of-kin of our officers have
a legitimate interest in this.
X﻿''V	...
C 0 ' f
»	• ^ \	t
1*1. ie	Off lee,
L i:'<2oei.
• 1 ( • «*
1,
;teu- ya toin GsHtsi;**s#
Ai.r.	'.y Ur-. . Iwiter fra 'l,	-l-..! I...-..; •. «.'!
our tmtffsssz -tifi;-, I n*.’ wkiIoso*
o) a nasi'’ .c.l roll, of o/.-. iewe saiuaiteu at MA^ryjPJ? on 6tii
EcjUesJssr, 1^14* aaf?- MSWBraovla# or. tho Gor-.' ;se s'6%rj.i«SMe
fat this apli»*
d) O' ' .■?• -r t: . 3feft.te.v-' "U' ji-ch' Jv. ifottet, r. Isogetjam
a/U .toda ^Li -xax; -enli • ; astejjf rvltlx tSo ons® of
beo-i h:	.'" C ::i Of "	. - •	,	•	1 \
(f) a ntJwdnaJL .*oI- of ter cm 6»Br«<lite5-a«Ki anfl x-Taaen Ujo a;
b* Ill i rtraocjd.
Will you kinhly refemt U-«4 «f|»tcr.'~.te H&fcod arv’ar	X
hsrs	to oantaeto Ga&tistb U>M' l1 tgr teleii»rw tKfe l¥tw MS ?
. r-e .xir r:rill try	but in ti»e ■■«..■■ :-t4s» Mfi fedi^es las
C&pteda il. 't»®ca?5,
10 : ..i Ooo yx, , . ?»
(t-.ilv.iir...its f.. ...rdo.'Um X>9?)
If you wite or aoecl to hi;. ...-laitfis- :ie.;:lo;* shit 1 '...aVo gtten ywt Ms
B". • -reos.
If you require aap ftsrte^r	or int'mr^tim on Um
iKirisis poteteso hMNi aioousoeS, I Misll he f;l;
I t;"	/•»’. :ror your jrrcmjUed
Tsar; -1 •‘osrely,
.od) .. h .1	,
0* ’ ,	^ ^	“ 4- ^ 4 r-t﻿OAPHI.
STATEKEMT
OP:-
Gaptain LUNDING Hans,
Danish General Staff.
12th my 1945.
I was arrested in Copenhagen on 29th August 1943. I was detained from
this date until 1st September 1943 “by Wehrmacht in Copenhagen when I was handed
over to the Gestapo by whom I was detained at their prison in Copenhagen. On the
15th September, 1943 I vra.s transferred to the Gestapo Headquarters at
ERIMYALBSRCIED STRASS3 No. 8, BERLIN.
I was given no reason for my arrest but on 17/l8th September I was
interrogated by Gestapo Officers including Kriminalrat EEMER and Kriminalsecretariat
SCHULTZ. These Police Officers were members of the SS SD. The interrogation took
place under strong electric lights, during which time I was threatened and intimi-
dated. These interrogations took place two or three times a week until about 15th
J anuary, 1944.
On or about this date the building in which I was kept was severely
damaged during an Allied Air Raid and then the interrogations ceased.
I was interrogated because the Gestapo believed that I was connected
with a Taste Underground Movement in Denmark. In fact I was connected with the
Danish Secret Service and from 1937 had contacted the British Secret Service. The
information passed by me and my Section after the Germans occupied Denmark,
included dispositions of German troops, Garrisons, guns, etc., in Denmark.
Also information was collected and passed about AA guns in Hamburg and VI sites
on the coast. Photographs and details of a VI experimental bomb were obtained
and forwarded via Sweden but the information was intercepted by the Germans at the
frontier. I visited Sweden in 1942 and at Stocldiolm contacted the British and
Polish Legations and was recognised by a German Agent who no doubt reported the
fact to their Gestapo authorities and this is more than likely the reason for my
arrest.
I was detained in Berlin until July 1944, when I was moved to a
Concentration Camp.
At Flossenburg in Bavaria in cell 21 where I ms detained until April
1945> I was quite well treated and had the same food as the SS troops. There
were between 10 and 15 British and Canadian Officers detained in the prison of
the Camp whilst I vra.s there. At first each roan had a separate cell but later
due to overcrowding two or more were put in a cell. The cells were arms breadth
wide and 5-g- paces long with a small boarded up window which allowed very little
light. During the time I was there I never saw the British or Canadian prisoners
out of the cells. The only furniture was a wooden bed and palaise of wood
shavings. In each cell there was a lavatory and a bowl to wash in. The
prisoners were allowed a bath a fortnight. The only clothes were the prison
uniform without underclothing. Three blankets were at first allowed but these
were reduced to two. These blankets were very worn and in filthy condition.,
I was allowed out for exercise for an hour each day. About the middle
of August the Kalfaktor (jailer) allowed me out when the SS guards were absent
and let me look into a cell No. 23 which was occupied by a Canadian Officer - I
believe a Captain. He was lying on his bed reading. He was about 27 to 35
years old, 5' 10", dark hair, lined face, haggard and starved. I do not know
his name.
Between the 1st and 15th September, 1944, about 4 o'clock in the
afternoon, I heard firing from what I took to be a firing squad about 250 yards
away. As this happened I heard a loud cry and everything ms quiet. The next
morning the Kalfaktor told me in the exercise yard that the Canadian Officer from
cell 23 had been shot. I did not see the officer after he was shot. The
Canadian Officer I believe was the Camp Leader of the British and Canadian
prisoners. I know that 2 or 3 days after the shooting that cell 23 ms occupied
by another prisoner who was allowed out for an hour each day.	The Kalfaktor told
me that the officer had been shot with full military honours by a firing squad which
was the only occasion that I know this took place.
The prison side of the Camp was divided into two wings - East and ’Test,﻿, - 2 -
and I -was in the latter. At the extreme end of the West wing was the site where
.executions took place and ray cell was about 40 yards - probably less - from this
spot.	From	a crevice in the wooden door of my cell I was able to see into the
yard and see prisoners being taken to execution. There were several reasons why
I knew they were going to execution^ firstly - the prisoners were always naked;
secondly - their hands were always bound either in front or behind them; thirdly -
there were always certain sounds which by i-eason of my long incarceration I was
able to understand exactly what they meant. There were two forms of execution -
one by hanging and the other by shooting. The shooting was carried out by a
revolver with a silencer attached, but in spite of the silencer there was always a
noise caused by the revolver which having heard on so many occasions I knew so well.
For hangings there were the necessary apparatus for six hangings to take place at the
same time and the apparatus consisted of six sets of iron rings fastened into the
wall each two rings being one above the other. Through each pair of rigs ms
placed an iron bar in the form of a right angle. By the lovrer ring there was
fastened a piece of rope at the end of which was a noose and the end of the rope
was hung over the iron bar. The prisoner ms made to mount a ladder, the noose
ms put over his head and the ladder then pulled away.
After shootings there was sometimes fresh blood to be seen on the ground
and sawdust - after hangings there was nothing to be seen.
Before executions the prisoners were put into the bathroom near the site.
In this room they were made to undress. The bathroom was about 15 yards from my
cell, and I could hear the patter of naked feet, as they walked from the bathroom
to execution. By the bathroom was a guard and just outside in the yard ms another
who was able to witness the executions. I could hear this guard call to the other
.guard on the bathroom "next11 or words to that effect, and following this order it
ms then I could hear the patter of naked feet. The guard in the yard outside made
sure that the prisoner went to the execution site; sometimes a prisoner would make
a dash in the opposite direction and would be shot. The prisoners, when they went
to the bathroom, did not know they were going to be executed - so far as they were
aware they were going for their occasional bath.
On 29th March 1945 I was not allowed to take my morning exercise which
consisted of a walk in the prison yard. Between 9 suvi 10 a.m. I heard certain
sounds and I got on to my knees and peeped through the crevice in my door. In the
yard I saw going towards the execution site naked prisoners.	They went by one at
a time with intervals of between 3 and 5 minutes.	Their hands were bound in front
of them, and each one was escorted by two guards.	I saw in all 8 or 9 prisoners
go by - then because of my cramped position I stood up, and although I did not see
anything further I heard several more pass by. I had never before seen prisoners
escorted to execution. I did not see anything more of these prisoners. When I
went for my exercise later that morning I ms not allowed to mill in that end of the
prison yard and was allowed only in the Bast Wing. My impression ms that every
precaution was taken to keep these particular executions secret. Later the same
day I ms talking to Rottenfuehrer WEISSENBOM (over whom I had some hold) and I
asked him who were executed that morning. At first he shrugged his shoulders and
said nothing. I then asked him if thejr were Germans and he said "No". I then
asked if it was my Danish comrades and he said "They are alright." I then said
"Was it the English" and he said "Yes - there are no more English and it is good so."
During my ten months detention in the prison at FLOSSEMBURG I iggself
witnessed about 400 people POLES, CZECHS, and RUSSIANS and a few Germans going to
their execution. The executions usually took place once or twice a week, there were
however, occasions when the interval was of a longer period. I saw from my cell
them going towards the execution site, naked, and at first T also saw bodies
being carried away on stretchers. After a time however I became so disgusted that
on seeing people walking to their execution I retired in my cell and did not look
to see the bodies carried away. At the execution there was always present a Doctor,
whom I saw on several occasions and I ms told by the KAIFAKTOR a dentist for the
purpose of removing metal fillings from teeth.
One day vrhilst taking exercise in the yard I saw a man who had just been
interrogated. He had been beaten about the face and he ms bleeding about the eyes,
nose and lips and was limping. He had obviously been severely beaten.
1 asked the KALFAKTOR the identity of this man and he told me he was a
Russian Colonel-General. Later the KALFiKTOR told me he had been executed.
From the window in my cell I was also able to see into the Camp Area and
during this time I saw many bodies being carried past the window. During the four
months from November 1944 and February 1945 I counted approximately 5*000 (five﻿- 3 -
thousand) bodies. The bodies were carried past my window on stretchers. At
first there were only 4 or 5 stretchers being used, but this was later increased
f to 7. On each stretcher two bodies were carried at the time. The people had
died from starvation or disease and sometimes the bodies were so emaciated as to be
almost shapeless and one could see just a bulge of their head and feet. The bodies
were usually covered by a blanket but it was always possible to see the head and
feet. Occasionally during the winter when the ground was covered with ice the
stretcher bearers would slip down and the bodies would fall onto the ground. The
bodies that I then saw appeared to be those of people who had died from starvation.
These are the personalities concerned in the camp and its general
administration about whom I can give information.
KOGE
SS OBEHSTUEMBANKBUEEIRER
BAUMMETiN S3 OBSSSTUEMMEHEER
WISDM - Otto KAUAKTOR
WITTICH Karl KALFAKTOR
VOGEL
KALFAKTOR
OBERSCHARFUEHRER
WEIBE Karl
SCHARMJHRSR
WOLFF Gerhardt DNTERSCHARFOBRER
1EISSEHB0HN Willy ROTTENFUHRER
Commandant of FLOSSMBURG during the whole of my
detention. Age about 55 - 60 years, height
5' 10”, fat, clean shaven, deep thick voice,
fat coarse face, brown eyes, high forehead,
fairly thick lips, rolling gait, small hands.
Not a regular soldier - last War Iron Cross.
Age about 34/35 years, height 5* 8” - 9",
proportionate build, military appearance, very
fair hair, clean shaven face becoming full,
grey/blue eyes, regular features, slow light
tread, quick tempered typical German Officer.
Jailor at FLOSSENEORG, Native of CHEMNITZ, age
39 years, height 5' 4i'/5", completely bald, grey
eyes, thin wiry build, hollow temples, thin face.
Barber in civilian life. Sentenced to 20 years
imprisonment for forgery. Able to give
considerable information regarding the Camp
because he was trusted and assisted with execu-
tions and allowed out of camp on Sundays.
Jailor at FLOSSENBURG. One time Secretary to
LUDENDORFF, age 47 years, height about 6',
angular build, almost bald, moved stiffly,
wore glasses for reading. Nervous disposition.
Jailor at FLOSSMBURG, age 30/35 years, height
6', thick light brown hair, light brown eyes,
one front upper tooth missing. Informant to
Camp Commandant.
C.O. of Prison. Feb. 45 till 15 Apr. 45 age
35/40 years, height 5* 4"/5"> lightly built,
eyes blue/grey, dark hair, several golden teeth,
think upright build. Military appearance.
Commercial clerk in civilian life at CHEMNITZ.
C.O. of Prison from July 44 or before to Feb. 45>
age 54 years, height 5’ 9”/l0”, hazel eyes, fair
hair, rounded shoulders, stooping. Clerk in a
German administrative office. Nasty
disposition and brutal particularly to British
prisoners.
Kept prison records. Promoted to his present
rank in Jan. 45. Age 46 years, height 5' 10",
scar over right eye, not very prominent, fair
thinning hair turning grey, false top teeth,
grey eyes. Native of WITTENBURG. Brutal to
Russian prisoners. Took part in executions by
shooting. Good pistol shot.
Supervised distribution of food etc. age 42 years
height 5' 8"/9", strong and well built, light
brown hair, eyes dark grey. Brutal appearance.
Electrician in civil life. Married with one
daughter. Lived in BISMARK STRASSE, EISENACH.
Stated he would not return to EISENACH.﻿HSMNSR Krimstrat
- 4 -
H.Q. GESTAPO, Berlin, age approx. 35
years, height 5' 9", fair hair, Blue
eyes, clean shaven, clear cut features,
slight build. Typical Nazi.
SCHULTZ Kriminalsekreta	HQ GESTAPO, Berlin. Age approx. 48
years, height 5* 9"} fair thinning hair,
grey eyes, thin face, nose large and out
of proportion. Slightly built, typical
NCO of German Police. Very efficient
and correct. Spoke Polish.
I have read over the above statement and it is true to the best of ray
recollection - I must explain that it has been taken down in English and that ray
knowledge of English is not perfect - it may therefore not be exact in some details,
but is substantially correct. (Sgd.) LUNDING.
Statement taken by Lt. Col. W. HEDDQN, DIM, SIB on 13 May 1945 in the presence of
Captain N. E. MIDDLETON and Captain J. A. STEVENS INTELLIGENCE CORPS.﻿STATEKMT OP:
SECEliT
MOGENBEN Jorgen Lariborg Pras,
Vice Consul,
Royal Danish Consulate,
DANZIG.

13 May 45.
In 1941 iifeilst I was Vice Consul in DANZIG, I contacted a Polish underground
movement whom I helped to organise. In 1942 I went to COFSdiAGM and there
contacted the DANISH organisation 'Postbox1, from whom I received certain instructions|
concerning the linking up of the DANISH and GDYNIA movements. This was in August
1942. In October of that year the GDYNIA movement which included the Pomeranian
area was rounded up by the Gestapo - I was not arrested. In April, 19435 one of the
Polish agents - Lucian CYLKOISKI - who had been arrested in October 1942, but later
escaped, again contacted me. He told me he was in contact with another Polish
movement controlled from WARSAW and that they had a wireless transmitter previously
dropped by the British for the Pomeranian movement, but they were unable to operate
it owing to lack of codes and necessary instructions and operators. False documents
and stamps were also necessary to assist the members in moving from one place to
another.
On 14th July, 1943, I went to COPENHAGEN, and made known to the Danish
'Postbox' 1:11636 requests. The 'Postbox' was controlled by the Polish Legation in
STOCKHOLM.
The 'Postbox' forwarded a letter to STOCKHOLM containing the requests
of the WARSAW controlled movement - GRYP POMORSKI - but it is believed that this
letter was intercepted at the frontier by the Germans. The reason why it was
thought that the letter had been intercepted was that the acknowledgement in code
over the BBC, was not received by the - GRYP PQMQRSKI - as expected.
Prom October 1943 to January 1944, I had no contact with either movements
owing to illness. In January 1944, however, a member of the 'POMORSKI' movement
visited me in DANZIG to collect documents and instructions for the movement. Prom
then onwards the visits were periodical.
On 19th March 44, I was requested by the Gestapo to visit their HQ in
DANZIG for the purpose of making arrangements concerning a DANISH prisoner.	On
arrival at the HQ I was accused by the Gestapo of having taken codes, stamps and
documents from the GRYP POMORSKI to the 'Postbox' in DENMARK. I ms also accused
of having given to 'GRIP POMORSKI'. information about German Communists in DANZIG -
further I was accused of giving 'GRYF POMORSKI' information of the DANISH movement
in general, and also sabotage carried out by British parachutists in DENMARK.
Whilst at the Gestapo HQ I saw the Polish Agent - LITCIM GYUvOWSKI - in a
corridor. As soon as I saw him his appearance convinced me he had been interrogated
and had had many hardships. He was very haggard and frightened, and although he had
no signs of -physical violence there was no doubt in my mind he had been detained for
some time. I was confronted by a statement made by him and dated 14th March
admitting I had assisted the underground movement. Being confronted with this
evidence and knowing if I denied it the Polish agent would be further tortured, I
admitted and signed a statement concerning ny previous activities with certain
limitations.
I was detained at the Gestapo HQ in DANZIG until 26th July 44, during which
time I was interrogated on many occasions but at no time was personal violence used.
On or about this date I was transferred to PLOSSENBURG, arriving two days
later. I was put into cell No. 24, and on one side - No. 23 - was a Canadian
Officer - a Major, and on the other side a British Lieutenant born in BELGIUM. The
Canadian Major told me his name was 'GUY'. He was very taciturn, but I learnt
from the Lieutenant in cell No. 25 and from an American Lieutenant in cell No. 27,
that he was chief of S.T.S. in PRANCE and was also their chief. I was told that
he had an injdry to his back and a broken knee - the latter having been received
during a German interrogation at MQuNNES, a suburb of PARIS. The British
Lieutenant informed me that the Major had complained to the Camp Commandant about
the lack of food and exercise for the British prisoners. The Commandant said he
would forward the complaint to BERLIN. The Lieutenant told me he had the greatest
admiration for the Major, who at PRERNES had undergone the severest form of interro-
gation and torture which included six instances when he was almost drowned and then
revived. The Lieutenant himself said that he had been beaten on several occasions
with truncheons.﻿_ 2 -
^	The name of the British Lieutenant was G-eorgeJ^^Jg^hut had adopted the
name of DEAhTS when he joined the British Forces in England, in order that his family,
still in BELGIUM, would not suffer. His address in England was 'Aspatria', 15 or 30
Outgang Road, CARLISLE. His family in BELGIUM lived at 15 or 30 Avenue de
WEESENBEGK, BRUSSELS. He was aged 24 years and married in England two months before
coming to France.
The American Lieutenant's name was John SULLIVAN. He had his 20th birthday
whilst in prison.	He was always ill - no doubt due to lack of food.
I stayed in cell Ho. 24 for about 2-g- months, - until Oct. 44 - when I was
moved to cell No. 2 in the East Wing. This was because I was making contact with
the British officers.
In September 1944, about a month previous to iqy move I heard the cell door
of Ho. 23 opened and I had the impression that two guards instead of the usual one,
called there and took away the Canadian major. There was some conversation hut I
could not distinguish it. I did not see the Major return and in fact did not see
or hear from him again. Some days after the cell ms occupied by an S.S. prisoner
I believe a Ukrainian.
Otto WIEDEN the Kalfaktor told me that the Canadian Major had been sent to
BERLIN for exchange. Everyone was pleased he was out of it, and the other English
prisoners thought that that might he their fate. Much later I was told by another
Kalfaktor, whose name I cannot remember, that he had Steen the body of the Major being
taken to the crematorium.
After ny move I found the following British prisoners in adjoining cells, all
in odd numbers.
Cell No. 1 A Frenchman then a Captain in the British Army. His code name was 'ROBIN',
His real name Jean WORMS. Born 1909, 22 Feb or 22 Mar. He ms chief assistant to
the Canadian Major. He and the British Officer in cell No. 7 were the leaders of the
other officers. His home was in PARIS, where he worked in peace time as chief agent
for the life assurance section of LLOYDS. His father owned the Maison Blanche, a
departmental store in PARIS. WORMS told me that whilst he was in FRENNES, Paris,
he was brutally tortured during interrogation by the Gestapo. The tortures included
the placing of two legs of a chair on his large toes and a Gestapo man jumping on the
chair until the toes split. An alternative method ms for the cioair to be placed on
the toes during interrogation and the Gestapo man sitting on the seat. If questions
were not answered, the interrogator jumped up and down on the chair. Another torture
was when he was seated on a chair and kept there for more than 72 hours, without food,
rest or sleep, during continual interrogation. When he fainted he was revived
without being released. I was able to talk much easier and for longer periods with
YfORMS than any of the others, as we made a small hole through the dividing wall of our
cells, throu^i which we were able to converse in low tones. WORMS had the greatest
and deepest admiration for the Canadian Major whom he stated had received the worst and
most brutal treatment from the Gestapo. .Even the Gestapo according to WORMS, had
admired the Major's fortitude and had rewarded his courage with a glass of champagne.
Cell No. 3 This was occupied by a Lieutenant of the British Army. His code name was
'ACHILLES'. I do not know his real name or his home address. He was about 35 years
of age, average height, dark hair, brushed hack, dark eyes, sallow complexion, caused
by starvation and hardship. ?/ore horn rimmed spectacles, fairly well built but thin.
In very bad health and his body ms covered with abscesses and boils. These never
received medical attention. The Lieutenant spent most of Ms time lying on his bed
because of extreme weakness. Believed that the Lieutenant was not tortured by the
Gestapo as he had been captured whilst landing by parachute. Apparently he did not
go to FRENNES.
Cell No. 5 A British Officer - either a Lieutenant or a Captain. His code name was
'EUGENE*. I do not know his real name. I saw Mm only once, from behind, and he was
of very short and small stature. High pitched voice. He occupied the cell with
another prisoner, a Yugoslav, BUDEN, and for security did not carry out much
conversation, as BUDEN ms not trusted.
Cell No. 7 A British Captain whose code name was 'JULES’. I have never seen him,
hut from general conversation, I believe he was connected with Barclays Bank. I
cannot supply any useful information concerning him. Joint leader with WORMS of the
other officers. Believed to have been badly tortured.﻿- 3 -
Cell Mo. 9. A Scotsman believed a Lieutenant. Code or real name not known. At
the end of Jan. or beginning of Feb. another British Captain or Lieutenant occupied
the cell with the Scotsman. His code name was 'ARISTIDE' and his Christian name
v/as 'BRIM*. I do not know his surname. Spoke English and French with a very-
educated voice. I never saw either of these Officers. 'ARISTIDE' had very-
severe stomach trouble which necessitated a special diet which was most unusual.
This fact makes me believe he was extremely ill.
Cell Ho, 11. One or two British Officers. I can give no information concerning
them.
Cell Ho. 13. One or probably two British officers. Again I can give no
information concerning them.
Cell Ho. 13. Occupied by Lieut. George DEMAND or DEANE, of whom I have previously
given information. There was also a German Communist in the same cell.
Cell No. 17. Occupied by a British Officer whose code name was 'MARCEL'. His real
name was Jack GRAHAM. Believed of Armenian extraction. I never saw or spoke with
him but heard has~v6ice over our communication system. He had a watch and each day
at every hour he would transmit the time by taps on the radiator.
For explanation the 'communication system' devised was as follows:- At
first, particularly on Sunday when one of the two guards was off duty, and the other
often went to bed, we used to shout to each other through a small wicker opening in
the door, used to pass food into the cells. One day 'Jules' told us to listen at
the lavatory pipe in the cell. It was then found that by removing the plug at the
bend in the pipe from the bowle to the mains sewer it was possible to converse with
ease in low tones with cells on either side from No. 1 to No. 17, a distance of 40
yards. Unless'the person in a cell removed the plug he was unable to hear or
converse with other cells. Apparently the other prisoners in even numbered cells
did not know of this system or speaking other languages did not use it as on only
one occasion have I heard a German voice over the 'intercom'. We also used morse
taps, but this v/as not very satisfactory as others could hear and it v/as only
possible to 'speak' to the nearest cells.
On 29th Mar. 45, about 5 a.m. to 5.30 a.m. our coffee, which was the only
thing we were given, was brought to the cells. At onoe I felt that something was
going to happen as this was an early hour for our food. My fears were Increased when
I was not allowed to go for ny usual morning exercise in the yard. About 0830
hours, I heard the doors of cells in the centre of the corridor opened - later these
turned out to be Nos. 9-11-1 then felt that Russian and Polish prisoners were
going for execution, but a moment or so later I heard WIESSENBORN'S footsteps pass
my door and go to cell No. 1 (WORMS) in which was also a Czech NOYAK. I heard
lEISSENBORN'S voice but v/as unable to distinguish it, it was quieter than usual,
a usual sign when executions were to take place. After he left the cell I got on
my knees and spoke to cell No, 1. The Czech was there alone and I felt WORMS had
gone for execution. I told the Czech to destroy any evidence WORMS may have left.
By this time I thought that I would be the next for execution, but then the guards
went to Cell No. 3 and 'Achilles' v/as taken away. Shortly after they went to Nos.
5 and 7 and took the prisoners away. I was sure then that all the British Officers
were being taken away for execution. Having been a prisoner for so long one's ears
become as reliable as one's eyes and one could 'see' events through sound. I have
grown to know every movement and sound. There was a lapse of time between the
prisoners from cells Nos. 5 and 7 going and those of Nos. 13, 15, and 17. At the
time I was under the impression that they were being shot, because of the short
lapse of time between each execution, and it is only later that statements made by
other prisoners have convinced me that they were hanged. In all six or possibly
seven British Officers had been taken away. After the lapse of time those from the
cells No. 13, 15 and 17 were taken.
I did not hear it myself but another DANISH prisoner LARSEN in cell No. 18,
told me that just before 'Marcel' in No. 17 -was taken in tapped in morse on the
dividing wall, "I hope they will end with me and you will not follow", then as
the guards opened his cell door he tapped "Goodbye - its 1005 hours".
About 7 April certain alterations were made at the execution site. This
site which v/as against the West wall of the prison had a lean to roof about 5 yards
wide supported by posts in the front. At the right side of this lean to shed was
a walled off portion about a third of the front making a three sided hut with roof.﻿- 4 -
This portion was used to store bodies after execution and before removal from
# the prison. On the above date the whole of the front ms walled in with rough
wood and a small white door fitted in the centre. The hanging apparatus was
removed and the blood soaked sawdust on the floor, swept up and burned. There
was a general tidying up of the area, no doubt because of fear of what the
approaching American Armies would find on arrival.
During the nine months or so I was at PLOSSEtiBIIRG- I saw through the door
of my cell in the West wing several hundreds of prisoners going to the execution
site. Also from the window I saw several thousands of bodies being carried up
the hill at.the side of the camp going towards the crematorium. From ray cell in
the East wing I also saw a number being taken to the crematorium from the opposite
side of the prison.
I have been told of various punishments which took place in the prison.
One Polish girl aged about 24 years was sentenced to either 25 or 50 lashes of the
whip, for attempting to escape. This punishment was believed carried out by the
prostitutes from the brothel. Another punishment was placing prisoners on
starvation diet and giving no food for various periods, and also removing the
mattresses and blankets.
The brothel was set up with female prisoners from the camps who were given
the option of becoming prostitutes or execution or other horrors. The brothel was
close to ny cell in the East wing and from talking overheard I do not think there
were more than 15 girls there at a time and it was run by WEIHE a Scharfuhrer, who
took bribes of cigarettes etc. for allotting various girls to the customers.
WIBSSEKBORN told me on one occasion that the ashes of bodies from the
crematorium were being used as fertilisers by the Germans.
I have seen Captain HINDING-'s statement giving the names and descriptions
of personalities of the camp and agree and corroborate them in all detail.
The personalities of the Gestapo at DANZIG are as follows
VENEDIGER Gunther Dr. Chief of Gestapo in DANZIG. This fact may not be well
known. Always wore civilian clothes. Aged about 38/40
years, height 5’ 11”, very well built, erect and not heavy
hair light brown, cropped short, greying at temples, eyes
hazel, wide open, small, continually darting from side to
side, clear cut features, handsome, but hard, brutal
expression. Married.
Vice chief of Gestapo in DAHZIG Dec. 1943 to Jan. 44» No
information on description. Lost his post and
transferred to West PRUSSIA to a small town.
Kriminaldirektor Gestapo in DANZIG. Believed head of
Political Section. Aged above 60 years, height not known,
normal, grey hair, eyes grey, Iron Gross Great War, fine
features, fairly well built, quiet, calm and dignified.
Kriminal Kommissar Gestapo in DANZIG. Obersturmfuhrer
of SS SD. Aged about 40 years, height 5’ 8" to 9", fair
dark brown hair brushed straight back, thick, eyes brown,
protruding, yellowish white and bloodshot, gave impression
of drinking heavily. Large wide mouth, thick lips,
curled up, heavy features, short thick neck, heavy build,
growing fat, legs thick and out of proportion. Gave
orders for torture of prisoners.
S0B0TTK3.	Krirrdnalrat Gestapo in DANZIG. Always wore civilian
clothes. Connected with Political Section. Aged 58 to
60 years, height not more than 5' 10'', very heavy build,
thick arms and fingers, grey thick hair, greyish eyes,
calm and polite, last ?rar ribbon.
Kriminalassessor Gestapo in DANZIG. Aged 32 to 34 years,
height 5' 9"j fair hair eyes .grey, very fine regular
features, good looking. Native of FRIEBORG, South
Germany. Married two or three children.
LETTER
(leier?)
V.
SCHQNSEITEN
LOELGEN
HUG﻿- 5 -
?
4fHaine not known)
Polish.
WETZLAFF Herebert
Polish with name ending in----SKI. Aged 29 to 20 years,
height 5' 10"/ll", hair dark brown, eyes dark broira., slight
build, erect carriage, very regular and white teeth, worked
in hEYER's Section in charge of DANISH questions.
Oberscharfuhrer HCO Gestapo DANZIG-. A.ge 35 to 50 yeai-s,
height about S'lO'', hea.vy strong build, .good horseman, hair
very fair and scanty, eyes light grey, good teeth, married and
a native of DANZIG-, living near the gas works. Stated he had
been a German spy and was executioner and had tortured
prisoners.
I have read over the above statement and it is correct and true to the best
of my knowledge and belief.
(Sgd.) J. MOGENSEN.
Statement taken down on 13/14 May 453 hy Captain N. E. MIDDLETON, ?8
Section, SIB, in the presence of Captain J. A. STEVENS, Intelligence Corps.﻿SECRET
SfcffiEMENT OP:-
A. MOTTBT,
Foremanj
RA3SM3S (Nord)
Prance.
I ms sentenced to death by the War Council of LILLE in January 1944 for
espionage and membership of the GAULLISTE RESISTANCE GROUP FOR LIBERATION. I ms
taken to the Concentration Camp at FLOSSMBORG in Bavaria on the 21st February 1944}
and put into solitary confinement.
The Carno Commandant was OEKRSTUKMBANNFUHRER SS KSGLER, a native of AILGAU,
district of Bavaria. His Adjutant ms OEERSTUEMFUHRER MUMGARTl'JER of KNESTRINj he
was the real Commandant of the Camp, he alone looked after the prison cells as he ms
also in charge of preparing the prisoners for the SS Tribunal of FLOSSEITBURG, which
was in permanent sitting.	This Tribunal sentenced to death without the accused
attending. The executions took place in the prison courtyard by either hanging or
shooting in the neck. The victims were first taken to the bath-house; there
SCHARFUHRER WSIHB (a native of MAGDEBURG) ordered them to take off all their clothes.
He then tied their hands on the back by means of a piece of wire, took off their rings
and any religious insignia they had on them, tore up the photos of their families in
front of them and finally led them to the execution. WBIHE himself did the hangings.
The executions by shooting were carried out by STURMMANN WEISSENBOM, WILL (age 43j
electrician from BlSENACIyTHURINGIA, SS volunteer since 1935) and TOmTERSCHARFUIIRER
WOLFF, Gerhard (age L-6, employee of the gas and electricity works of WITTENBERG/ELBE -
Martin Luther's birthplace - and living there in the 1EINSTRASSE). In charge of
these executions was the Adjutant BAUMGARTNER. If the victims were Russians he often
had them whipped before the execution.
Also present were a civilian doctor from a place about 10 kilometres off
FLOSSENBURG, who was attached to the SS, and the SS dentist, who pulled the teeth
of the victims after death. The dead were then carried by ordinary prisoners on
trolleys to the crematorium, where they were burned, together with people who had
died of starvation or disease or maltreatment. The civilians were not allowed to say
a prayer or to give a farewell kiss to their dead comrades. Any suggestions of
that kind drew insults and sarcasm. Afterwards the SS shared out any valuables the
victims still possessed.
The prisoners who arrived at FLOSSENBURG from Special Courts or from outside
working gangs (mostly Russian and Polish Officers) were held in cells stark naked,
without towels, soap, blankets, toilet paper, heating, palliasses, very often 5, o or
7 in the same cell, without food or water and sometimes they had to wait in this state
four days for the execution.
After every execution, BAUMGARTNER, distributed cigars, tobacco mid 'schnapps'
to the SS who had participated.
The SCHARFUHRER YffilHS hanged at least twelve men per day. There were not as
many executions by shooting in the neck, but on the 4th September 1944} 132 Russian
Officers were shot by WOLF, and two Ukranian SS who came from the SS barracks for the
purpose.
The cell prisoners who had permission for a half hour or one hour's walk per
day were able to observe traces of the executions in the following way:-
The clothes of the victims were left in a heap on a trolley in the court-yard,
often for several days; in wet weather one could see the prints of nude feet from the
prison to the execution place; the blood in the gutter; and the particles of brain
scattered about.
When executions took place, the daily exercise was belated and shortened and
they tried to prevent us from looking around. Also one heard the shots and the screams
of the victims.
All cell prisoners were able to see the corpses being carried past their cell
windows for about 200 yards. Not only I but also the following prisoners have observed
all this; they were in single confinement also for a long time and will confirm all
this if one saw fit to interrogate them:-
Mr. GUSTAV CEIMIN, from LATVIA (RIGA) of cell 19﻿- 2 -
i
Capt. HMS LTOIDINd- from DETMAEK., COEEMHA.GEN'.
The Danish Vice-Consul in DANZIG - JOSRGER MOGENSM.
Mr. GREEN1,7ICH of the British Legation in SOFIA.
Lt.-Col. of the Yugoslav Army - HIMO DRAGIGH from SEMLDl, near BELGRADE
The Danish Officers of the British Service, MSKELSEN, HANSEN, LANSEN.
Also Messrs. SCHUSCHNIGG, Ex-Clmncellor of ikistria and the Prince of HESSE
who had a room each. They were not in cells, and being "better off than any other
prisoners, they could hear better what happened.
On the 9th April 1944, Easter Day, there arrived at PLOSSMBJRG, 15 Allied
Officers, who came from the prison of FRESHES (France). They had carried out special
missions and had been arrested in civilian clothes in France between June and August
1944. I was then in Cell 26; my neighbour on the right in cell 25 was a Lieutenant
of the British Airborne Infantry, GEORGES DESMAN, whose parents lived in BRUSSELS (he
■was tattooed a lot on his chest). On iqy left in Cell 2? there was an American
Lieutenant, John ... (l have forgotten his name); he was a Bachelor of Art of the
University of Paris, and his father was building autogyros (helicopters) for the U.S.
Navy in New York.
By means of morse we were in touch with each other every day. They told me
that they had been beaten and sentenced to death by the Gestapo in PARIS. They and
their comrades had been tortured in the cellars of the prison in the Avenue Foch
(property of ROTHSCHILD) and had received the same treatment which was meted out to me
in the same place (blows, kicked, whipped etc.)
Of the 15, there were 13 English, one American, and a Canadian Major. The
prisoner who brought us our food told us that the Major and the English Officer, who
had occupied cell 23, had been shot on the 12 th June, 1944, by the UNTEESCHARFUHRER HIES I
and MOHR, under the command of BAUMGARTNER. All these officers were in dark cells, had|
no outdoor exercise, had only the food of the ordinary prisoners, which meant that they
were starved to death; they received no treatment in case of illness; left their cells|
only every 15 days for a shower and a change of shirt. The shower lasted only 15
min. and they took it singly. They were shaved once a week, and their hair was cut
once in two months. Very often they were deprived of food and beaten by "WEIHS.
During December 1944 and January 1945, i.e. until the arrival of SCHUSCHNIGG, I
■was the most senior prisoner and was ordered to help in the distribution of food and
the maintenance of the central heating which was situated in the cellar of the prison.
So I often had the opportunity to talk with Capt. of Artillery, Harold BOWDEN, aged 37,
two children, of LONDON. He load been in the French campaign and at FLQBSEBBURG he had
cell No. 7. He had studied in PARIS and in 1942 had been sent there for the
Intelligence Service. He had been beaten by the SS so terribly that "his brain was a
bit upset. In cell No. 1 was LIEUTENANT JEAN WORMS of PARIS, son of the owner of the
firm of "La Maison Blanche", he was in the R.A.F. , Jew, and also on permanent missions
to France like BOWDEN. In cell No. 11 was LIEUT. PHILIPPE J. A1EHMTI. of JJO Liberal
Club, London, age 27. I have forgotten the names ofTEe" others, but the Englishman
GREENWICH and the Dane MOGENSEN, which I mentioned before, can complete this list,
because they were also in touch through morse. MOGHNSHN received often Red Cross
parcels and often he gave me books which I succeeded in passing on. All these
comrades of misfortune were hanged on Easter Thursday, 1945, under orders of BAUMGARTNER]
just ten days before our evacuation from FLOSSEHBURG to DACHAU.
On the first Saturday of October 1944, twelve Russian Generals were shot by
WOLFF in the prison court-yard. One of them wore the badges of a commander of the
Armoured Corps.
Three Polish women of the WARSAW RESISTANCE, one of them eight months
pregnant, were hanged on the 8 th January by WE HIE.
On the 11th January, two Polish children, 12 and 13 years old, were killed
and dragged by their legs by WEIHE.
Through the cracks in our cell doors we could see the prisoners condemned to
death pass by’on their way to the executions. Mr. CELMINS, whom I have mentioned
before, can confirm this. Later on one could see the return of the corpses on the
trolleys.
My work in the central heating cellar enabled me to see there some
instruments of torture, such as whips, oxentails, knotted ropes, cat o' nine tails.﻿- 3 -
<
as well as parts of English, French, Russian and Belgian uniforms. During one
atccution I was locked in my cell, hut when I went into the cellar afterwards I found
■bits of jaws and teeth and also bits of brain still sticking to frames which the
SS had not burned completely in the incinerator. I often heard screams and groans
from the coal cellar which was situated under the prison court-yard but I ms never
able to find out more about it.
I would like to mention especially the Prince of HESSE. He was very friendly
with the SS WOLFF, WEIHE and WEISSENBORG-. He was also a great friend of the
Commandant, who paid him courtesy calls every week. Before his arrest he 3md been
an SS General.
With reference to the tortures to which I had been subjected in LILLE and
in PARIS during the interrogations about my case, I would like to reserve my detailed
statement until my return to France. I will just say here that I ms not spared
anything on behalf of the Gestapo; hunger, oxentails, thumb screws, broken teeth,
fetters. I am at the disposal of the Allies for all this information, and after
having seen ny family again, I am prepared to accompany a mission to FLOSSHNBURG.
I have made this statement as a solemn declaration and I demand that justice
be done.
(Sgd.) A. MOTTET,
Foreman,
RAISMES (Nord)
France.
NAPES, 12th May, 1%5.
P.S. All guards at, FLOSSENBURG were members of the SS STUHMBANN TOTENKGPF
This .is a true translation to the best of my ability.
(Sgd.) F. G. SUTTON, Oaptain,
Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire Regiment﻿Tel. No.: Abbey 6131
M.0.1. (S.P.)>
The War Office,
JO-

Whitehall, !
London, S.W.l.
/
Any further communication on this
subject should be addressed to:—
28th November, 1945
Flt/G. V. M. ATKINS.
Dear
FLOSSHiBBRG
As you know we are still trying to identify
two out of the fifteen officers who are known to have
been executed in the above camp. I have now been given
the name of a Genaan prisoner, Karl STERFLIHG-ER,
56 Haldperlacher Strasse, Munchen 49, who may be able to
give us additional information on the fate 01 our irienos.
I attach herewith extract of the letter written
by a Frenchman, Lieutenant George GUILLEMIH, 69 rue Victor
Hugo, Comorabes, who was detained in the camp giving
particulars of Karl STifflFLINGIiR.
Many thanks for your help in arranging the
various interrogations.
Yours sincerely,
^ - . c<2-o
Captain Galitzine,
Ag.3 (W) War Crimes,
20 Baton Square,
S.W. 1.﻿COPT
Extract of letter dated 8th October, 1945 received . ,, ,,
from Lieut. Georges GUILLEMUT, 69 rue Victor Hugo, COLCMBES.
/	*	L
..........Apres la liberation, un de mes anciens co-detenus de
Flossenburg, un politique allemand, KARL STERFLINGER, informe de mes
connaissances en anglais vint_me demander un service. Pour une
affaire quelconque, il avait ete mis h I'Arresthafts (prison) de
Flossenburg en Decembre 1944 et en etait ressorti h la mi-janvier
1945. Pendant son sejour en prison, il avait partage la cellule
d'un officier anglais, ce dernier lui avait dit que 17 autres de ses
camarades, de meme nationalite et du ijteine service (special service
brigade) etaient dans la merae prison. Get officier avait demande h
Sterflinger de lui fournir, lorsqu'il sortirait de cellule les moyens
de s'evader, ce que notre allemand fit trfes loyalement, mais 1'entre-
prise etait trfes difficile, si non impossible et il ne semble pas qu'il
y ait eu rneme une tentative; en outre, il lui donne I'adresse de sa fatnille
en angleterre avec mission de donner des nouvelles dtes que possible.
Get Officier etait authentiquement britannique, il^m'est malheureuse-
ment impossible de vous fournir son identite, ma memoire etant devenue
trfes inegale, h la suite d'un acces de typhus, mais je puis plus simple-
ment vous mettre en rapport avec Starflinger.
Ce dernier, par des renseignements precis (il avait
quitte Flossenburg avec moi le 26 janvier 1945) savait que son ancien
camarade anglais de cellule avait ete extrait de I'Arresthaus aved les
17 autres detenus vers la fin mars pu le debut djavril, selon une methode
(I'un apr'es 1’autre)-1 qui faisait presager des executions (celles-ci
avaient lieu dans la cave de I'Arrasthaus, les corps etaient
immediatement emmenes au creinatoire. Le Revier, ou le schoraung
(convalesence - etaient tout pr'es de la prison, nos caioarades^francais,
inedecins ou infirmiers ont vu souvent les mouvements qui precedaient
et suivaient ces executions: arrives du commandant de camp, du medecin
allemand, d'officiers et de quelques S.S.; assez longtemps apres, sortie,
puis la civifere.. de nonibreux officiers russes de la gamison de SfbastopoL
furent ainsi executes durant mon sejour au camp. Sterflinger conservant
peu de doute sur le Sort de son ami de quelques semaines voulait
avertir, par mon intermediaire, la famille du jeune homme de ce qu'il
savait, je fis done cette lettre en anglais oh je relatais ce que vous
venez le lire.﻿L'evacuation du camp de Flossenburg/^- envisagee depuis -quelque temps
doit etre la cause iiiomediate de I'exectuion de ces off icier s : les
Allemands ont •elimine, ceux quails jugeament d'abord les plus dangereux,
sur tout cela, nos camarades medecins ou infirmiers, Michelin "Miohe",
Noel Jourdev aui ont vecu les derniers mois de Flosseriburg pourront vous
donner d'utiles renseignements. Quant b la vie dans 1'Arresthaus
Karl Sterflinger pourra vous en parler / Karl Sterflinger, 56} Hald-
perlacher Strasse, Munchen 4^ (Dd). Ge politique alleiaand (co muniste -
depuis 1936 en camp de concentration est digus de confiance._ Ayant
vecu en France, parlant et ecrivant bien le francais, cultive, il a
rendu de nombreux service^ k des Francais (dont je suis, ainsi que M.
Jean Crouan, ancien depute du Finist'ere ..etc..) vous pouvez lui ecrire,
je^suis persuade ou’il est encore k Dachau, utilises les services angle
americains pour le rechercher, d1 ailleurs il n'a pas k se cacher."﻿﻿■ loan© yen j’xt. 392,
A
XM. .'fJOC/O (a. ,3. (V.- ,)).
B, A. 0.7?.
)/$
iU .3 (V. ,),
20	"
LO'r"'At 3.” .1.
H Decei.Bfcr, '.345>
Sub.-ktotF103;x.h; ::A::^ v. itr- tl A
Ref. the j'-ccnt viei'c to you of F/0 At’ h.a,	oi*
M.C.I. (' . .) , t-f Office.
1.	M.0,1, (n,P..) ‘is set. •	‘	’
iflantlflcation of two out of fifteen of t sir i r ■ in the
above omp in 23th ifcrch, 1335. H	' 11 of ons of thaS0
two h&e he® premssea, hut furtMr confiiw.tiora is really nececsaxy.
2.	It is undcrotoou that r.n ex-interR>.-:, txarl fieri inner, of
56, BW.hperln.ch- r Atrauns, /Jmchc-n 49, ™-'7 he able to
additional information on this subject* Thic sm -ma last renortva
to r.o still at DAG: id on Oth October, 1945.
5.
Itoit
4*
Please vdll you contact 5023 U. . "'hr Cri-.es investio’tioa
t at d.:'a..UJ oad find out if thic man is avr.iiotiie for
){fpL
E®
nh i be •ueuti uied to i; .e ii 'antit'.' wi descc.u - .txon
‘ ‘ -L {'*7-tic:'.ow) and
of two British officers srfeo were kmomi an m,c	^	-	»
Noel Jourdoy. Also the identity of the offi	to Cell f.an°'
Cell Ho. 15 (removed Juuo/Sspt. 44) in the Arresthaus,^in addition
to any 'general information he can ive oonfr.nain'! the ide n-xty and
fate of the other .j.
. {
D.A.A.6*
XG/JM﻿COPY
(U 1145/1145/73)
SECRET
VI
VI
ants

>
£>e<LRe~T
12th January, 1946.
M 'il1
a.g.s. (v/wy.
URITED NATIONS WAR CRIMES COMMISSIOB Mt(l *7<fDater bA/i/£
Trial of persons accused of committing </S> A
war crimes in the Plossenimrg and Maut-	/
hau :.en concentration eamps\	.
________________________x W*________
The following letter has been received from Colonel
Hodgson and is circulated to you for infomation and
appropriate action:-
Oib-V	"5th January, 1946.

Dear Colonel Lediiigham,
On December 12, 1945 I infomed you that the United
States Military Authorities in Germany were preparing for the
trials of certain persons accused of committing war crimes in
the Flossenburg and Mauthausen concentration camps. This
infomation was circulated to the members of the Commission
in Commission Document No. 160, dated December 13* 194. •
Yesterday, I received from the Deputy Theater Judge
Advocate in charge of the United States Amy's Tfe.r Crimes
Branch at Wiesbaden, the following letter, dated 22 December
1945, with reference to this subject:
"1. The authaixsen and Flossenburg concentration
camp cases involving the murder and mistreatment of
nationals of many of the Allied nations are now
being prepared for trial.
2. To expedite the trial of the perpetrators
in these cases the Branch is seeking all available
infomation relating thereto and it is accordingly
requested that you, as a member of the United Nations
War Crimes Commission, ask all the United Nations
affiliated with your commission who may have in
their possession evidence pertaining to the above
cases to forward as soon as practicable the same to
The Deputy Theater Judge Advocate,
War Crimes Branch, U.S. Army,
APO 633, U. . AR1Y."
Sincerely yours,
(Signed) JOSEPH V. HODGSON,
Colonel, SAGD."
CcrjSbuj	•
(i﻿﻿mm
■
m (a)﻿-<3f x-'tr-’ST . 4'"^’'‘r'	jj~\v
flte mtmi* Will nat b« dlitributK
Witslda Bpitish Government deportment*
sp headquarters, or re-transmittod even
in cipher, without bsinf* ptrar'nrafie ■.
3Hm3H AW OS' m BfgKa: 0
-^. ~
D,O.P* m/GRfABT
FSCMi .aAS 0833433 33HAICSH CITiS TSftCB SKSHSD iOK
TO I	S. JJ'OR
iRANCII
SI
9 JAM um] ,
’Ll.TOlti
tT3MI'
164. COKFlDat^XAL.
FOXiOKB® MAT3SK OF HK3H33T . RI£3KITY. RSQUS3T3 33IMJ 3SKT
CKAKK&S. ALL MATT® HSRK QGMSRm FLOBSaNBORG CA'a5 CABS,
saotffis AVAlLABIUETY OF GSR -AM POf RUSDIGCK BSRT033I, OONB’IMD AT OAISP
B®mE l^iMBSR TWO MAR NQ8E&N (GSGS 4346, SHEST K 54, OOCRDINATS» Q:63)
te 'HAIEJF® to OAB£F 29, OAO'LAU.
SjSi,|@sp; YOU OSOURFS AffAIiABILlTI OF FOLLOVING FKTSLNDLY ;?ITH^33jSS FOR
mHWS TIvN3F38» HSIt®IOH BOOST, OCRtSTRtCWOK 3M5IM®, BOBM 31 JAMAHY
1*94*	two Gsimm, Fm:mix of 24 sKDBi^auosa, wmma,
WAGXM&m TOur^UNRSi^tUuSK (GBGS 43^SHS3T L 54, 000RDIKAT.33 S $0)
asnsssttA.. h^ssks b:., gic, usutjjnakc colorhl yugoslavtak amb mas,
ifdOMAn ATAT-^y rJm mjTIm Qg, 78 3WTI0Nt .jp&ub imrnn&ATicm
mmm, n •
L19i§ ATS AM UMm.m FLAGS.
‘U ,s>’ "-'i	-IL-1 nSTSaMMAISB, '"O JEEt ivSSHDAM' OF BTUTT*./iRT.
a aammu say,	was 10 ibebjahs hot as ms a otsoise of
MS * A «8 «	so B,a IS OHM,
TT
O.V.G. 081(X)2A

/	'V. ^
:;*N< V
o\
o
o
o
;o
o
o﻿ftfimtiams

B.m/15223/11/A/JAG ,
January 1$I,/
m n

?d Sectioiij	C.M.P.,
13 o .A* O.R.
3ubjectt	War Crimes
i' icissenbur^ iJonoentration Canp,
1*	I have received a request mriced *UHQr3Sf, HIGfiaS?
PSIdUuX* frots the -ar Criues Brandi,	to secure as
a witness a Lieut-colonel of the Xu&o-elavian Air Porce, who
ijave a stateraent to bo, 70 Jection .3.1,13, cm 15 May 1945 at
an unkriomi place*
2.	I am av.aro of the fact that tlie inforciation applied,
by 0.a.F*33,T. to find the witness is very scanty, hut I
thought that in vies? of the high rank of the witmss the
person taking the statement, if still in tills theatre, rs&ght
reraaaber,	~	.
Ixt. 2628
Group Captain
Legal Staff
J.A.G-’s lira rich (War Grirass Section),
H.Q. British Amy of the inline,
B« .4*0*11*﻿i^arRioo'D.
m MCE
I4iUB/l522a/l 1/Mjna,
January 1946*
,/T\
aubjectt	War Grimes
Plosnenburg Concentration Comp

1.	X have received a teleprlnt marked	ftwa
the War Grilles Branch, U., requesting us to secure the
availability of the following witness
'.0.x. RUHjlOCK m T033I,	n	•*
held at Garap I3ERIJXi No. 2 near IIUHDEH (G3G0 4346, clieet K 54,
Co-ordinates Q 65).
2.	U.o.F.E.l. request, that this PC*? be transferred to
G&sp iio. 29 DACHAU.
i tcfc. 2628
J.A.C-’a Brarash (iVar Crlcies lection),
H.y. British away of tlie Fiiifse,
B* A. O.d.
Group Ga tain
Lisgal dtoiT
SBrSi/G﻿/////

{ SUBJECT: ELOSEUBITRG- Goncentration Gamp
J. g( jos)
BESTRIOTEIU'
B TOB/37711 /293/A(P3,4)
2) Jon 4^.
The attached statement by PUTS, Dental officer at the
above named canto, is forwarded for information and return.
Ext: 2407
Headquarter#,
British Army of the Bhiri<£ MQBRJTISH A*-^VV Q
BOAS .	T OF1“£ ’	'	' V
M
if E3GISTESED/UICI nGISTATAD﻿Bur
lielgiali ,/ar Crimes Commission
Liaison l ission 21 st a,&.
BELGIAN WAR C
allied mi:.,;;
I-LQ. MttTISII ML.:.
e; a, o
:? -‘IMES HZSPION
I’NS CAMP ■
OF A1IE RHINE
. R.

Investigation team n) VI
Jmfmo
in N°2 GIG
at
on
SaNDSCS
behalf
on January the 11 th 1946, at 1000 hrs,
Tel, before us, albert CALLSWaERT, Lieutenant , working
of the Belgian War Crimes Commission, with help of nugene LOlTn,
ind Lieutenant, acting as secretary, has appeared:
JdJTa Heinrich, old 37; H4 Bturmfuehrer in the Waffen 3S., g Panzer
division. Toteikopf, born on 1.9.08 in ESSM	WO^ed ^n
ESSEN -i-ltenessenerstrasse . a-, pnsonersn0 356655, now interned
beinp busy m this aampt th^ir ' e~o .	nd also ^ews were amongt
and martly	nf in Shlprge waf at Sat time, Stur-
the detainees, leh Lagerko mancan	Laser-
bannfhr. KUNSTTER, and he was still	frSm th*» '
SfLS	'
ees and to lock them up and I he,rd rom	that time the Sturt"
ms =>-i®
rnf^d'^/^gSrSb^ ?rssTi^a». rissr-'
le	cL«oll	OJ	tbe	c.p^nder^i^o^^d^.
dlnr^r^rSaS the'AecuUons I cannto bell you.ost probabl
did
mere done by the detainees themselves.	Boors +
T know that at that time there were about 6 to SOOO detair
5T Fi i L .(> ’R (mothercamp) itself and about oOOO more th
Komandos outside, unongst these ther were a majority of
and Tchecks and the other of all nationalitys. I had
helpers who were themselves detainees and worked as dent
SutMdeKommndos. The n .nee of these dentists are MM >
dence I do not know and WILLIE, -gon, who came from the
and whose xexact adress I do not know. I had llso a Russiax.
under my professiomi^ontrol^	nQt occured mass .
tions during my stay in the camp, but I khow thetr have been ef
tioris and thoire was in this camp a crematorium but their .	-
gas-chamber. aas far as I know the deathrate was at that time
hie-h* it can be estimated at about 5G to 60 deaths a month.
~ ’	i have often seen prisonners being ill-treated by^jL
rers and S3 men whose n imes I do not know and I never have seen
beating the prisonners to death.
﻿MMMMh
On dpril 11th 1944 I was posted to the concentration camp of
. jIUTTHOF near Dantzig »her I worked as a dentist. This camp hid only
political prisonners, about 7500 nrisonners and the majority of this
prisonners were poles. From the point of vue of the material - lire and
treatment this camp was very good and these prisonners worked in the
germann irmy equipment plants wich were on the. spot.
-‘•he Lager Kommandant was Stubaf HOPPE whom I found good for the
prisonners I never heard the; contr^.ry. There I have seen people being
kifeked to the ground by the. Kapos; their w.^s a crematorium in this
camp and death sentenaes in this camp wss were executed. I hn.ve no
notions wat so ever of the de .thr ;te after ill-treatment as this camp
was very large; personaly I can fix nothing about it but I understand
that the deathrate increes from day to day. The Kapos of this camp
were in majority.Poles and my polish helper, a lawyer named LEW .NDOwSKP
should be able in this case to give interesting informations about the
behaver of the Kapos in this camp to the prisonners. This camp has t
than been enlarged and the strengh of detaineses increesed to
40.000 men and majority were jews and it was not possible to accomo-
date this prisonners in the C-.mp itself so they were distributed in
the outside Kommandos. In general these people look very bad and thlr^^
food aws also very bad and the deathrate was very high. 8xk0 The 'S.
in this camp was Haufsturmfuhrbr Dr. HEIDI., who has also several do
tors under his control.
I left that camp on January 17th 1945 and was posted to
LaUEKBDHG- in Pomerania with my equipment .s the c .mr had to be eva-
cuated and the camp w-.s itself moved to the ire^ of Lauenburg exactl
to EINZELLaGEBN.
Later I run away to Dantzig than by sea and arrive in the xrr
island of RIJEGHN were I Was ordered to Neungamme. T went then to
Neungumme vsfere I stayed caly for two days and then on the ad of may 4
I was taken prisonner. ./hen I arrived in Leungamme the camp was alr4
dy- evacuated and as far ,.s T know the prisonners has been taken to 1
the area of LUBBEGK. I also heard that the remaining ill people had
been taken away by the Swedish red-cross.
I can swear to you that I.never ill-treated a prisooner. as
a man and as a doctor I always did my duty.
This is all I can state.
Reread and accepted signed,
(s)Kotte	(s)Dr.Putz	(s)C -llewaprt.
Certified translation.
Lt. Col. BE? . BR-iNDElS.
Chief of 1 ission.﻿RESTRICTED
A(R34)
1SAOH/15C2B/II/ Sv'J AC
Feb 1+6

CUBJRC'i’: ./ar Crimes -
FLOSBERRURC uoncent ration
lieinrich i:‘lJTC
Rex'erence j'our minute	dated 21 Jan
relating to the above named.
1. The stataaeat that you attached with the
above minute was oi considerable interest but the above
camp is no\/ beii\, oealt with by the Ainei’ican » ar Crimes
authorities, to whora I have passed the statements
concerned, retaining one coxxy in this ofiice.
2. It is fairly certain that the , merioan
authorities will ask for the delivery of Heinrich IVi'Z
both for interrogation and a possible accused in the
FLOCCJaffililiG Concentration Cra p case, and perhaps you would
be good enough to ut me know where he is now located and
what nations are requiring him as a war cxdminal as he may
have been concerned in other concentration canpo not in
the nerican none.
3. as the statement of Heinrich HJTZ v/a© taken
by the elgian ,<ar Crimes authorities, it woixM be
advisable to ask for his present whereabouts and whether
he can be released to the ritish ; ennanently, or taaporarily
for interrogation purposes.
Ext: 262C
J;V>, j)ranch(uar Crimes deotion)
Aw,British Arrrty of the Rhine,
b. A. 0. R.
GIGD/JT﻿R^'Rlcrt-S

iit -Jolonel	L. Fob ir6
b. j. ..:ar ,/duaoQ ..iaiaosi :• '©tudsaent,
mLt
JUBJBJ'fi ;ar Oriraas -
>iIfliuB-J- uonacKtcatiga_1£ra».
1.	£ eneloae aoteo or &a isiterrojation v,?;ich I
ctaiaucted to Fib;.r.iQJcd.’-.4i-ir»Iii on JQ Jan 46 which I would
bo oblijed if you woiil, transwlt to tihe aipropriato
depurtncnt of ^yaerican rar Criiaea ueolir^; with Fh0.vj,ijlUijJ
Co.ujents&tioxi Oeaap. X unuorotand that a Captain ituiAfl®!
wbrktog at DAtltaU (;oiicontration CaE3j.> ujuitir ocK;iaaiKi of
x& Jolonai 2> U.J. wfsr CriLcwa, i-hird Anpr ataff Juu^e
-n.voca.te, who to tho officer prepai*in»< the Fii) a .AliU r- case,
and to wJiom tho endowed rc^^ort of interrogation wilr be
of Mtdebahoe.
2. fho witness interrogated was a certain Gilbert
Ulxiloi? i. w!;o hru‘5 been in ooixoentration coe^js since I93^i
an a j>olitic-:l unreliable Gew«m oitismt.
3* it :n;v7 assist aptain : .-lK&i'iXCKI that I think
this Gerr/tan would be a useful and accurate witness in the
FLOJ. ) UBURd case and he is subraittto^ a full sit. detailed
sic.m;d statesaent of the -whole of his e^erienoes at
KoGd-.i iffllEaJ, ivhioh eaperienoes are only suraraarised in the
enclosed toterro ctia. note. I will r.ic.-.na^e for tho full •
st&t®aont of the witness to be cent to you for onward
tit-uisninsicn to the U.w. ildLrd .ax^y. i':© is living at the address
jivon, with his	and is always available.
4* 'ifsieralJy, it \soul.. be a;-rv--coinfeed in this Bmidb
if infor r.tion could be reoeivou whemve t any of the
i>ersonalitii..s of too carap staff arrested who neve directly
amoorncid to the ourcler of the. 13 British sjeraoni-^l to the ct£K>.
t t!ie same time a furtlser endeavour will be raade to pass ell
inforsaatitm on .-'UK, J-B.-w .«& to you &.»! to deliver ary personnel
■ cio ia.%, sc arres toe xn this sooe for ^jartidpaticai to activities﻿at

5. I a2ao enclose ovig&tiul ^iraoa atetet-icat
taken by the Ijelgiaa .;ar c,-3aes authoi’ities froa caie
•teinrieh H®3», Hauntstuimfuhrer, wh© irate a- dentisjtffe
and wt»'^>peat®'to bi - .	in tflra
aone» and no doubt you WUl lot saes. know apy instruotions
that ssay be required with rejard to- the future .deposition
of ttslE nan Titles® v/hereabouta X lx-, no;; tracing.
last: 262b
J jranah(. ar Uxliaos .iectionj
critiah Arsy oi" the hine#
» V , O, :
GIDD/JT﻿NOTE
COPY of attached to oe sent to U.o.
War Crimes Authorities, 3rd Amy, MUNICH
(Attention: Captain MARAEIOTI, iunerican JAG)
(B/P PLOoCKNBERG Pile to GHD for minute)﻿ma(/l!}226/ll/ll/jAG-
NOSES FBQty INTEHEOSATION
Of
Albert CHKISETAL of 9 Wehrheiraerstr, PRAI-KFiRT
on 30/l/k6«
Subject arrived in camp of Mr on 16/4/40 as a
political unreliable of Gerraan nationality having first been
in the KS SACHaENHAUSEN. The CoaBandant was Si'urmbannfuhrer
KUSTIER.
Subject was an electric light iaechanic and then looked
after the special museum founded by the -.V.H.A. which was run
like a criminal Evuaeum with interesting exhibits, including
handy work of the jjrisoners, instruments of escape, stats etc.
This was a small camp of some 3*000 people at this
time, mainly Germans and the first foreigners were Czech
prisoners from TAUS. Next can® a large transport of Poles
from AOdCHvvITa, find at the era of 40 beginning 41 came the
first consignments of Russian Pfs. These FWs received specially
bad treatment, luck of food and many were injected with IlgOg
causing death in half a ninute. On one occasion the Poles had to
stand to attention on the Appell-plats for 36 hours because one
Pole had escaped.
The adjutant was Obersturafuhrer BAUK(PiRTHEE, a perfect
bastard who was at BILGSoENlMKr throughout.	^
.’here was also Kauptstun:ifuhrer H. AMlQiYEE who was a
lagerfuiirer and was known as "the beating seyer* being a German
pun on the name AUMEYER. He was always giving adverse reports
to the Gestapo on prisoners resulting in their continued detention
in the KZ.
BUSTLER, the Commandant, went away for a period and was
rej;resented by BOEDER who instituted a system of hanging people up
by their hands for hours at a time. There was a Kauptsturnfuhrer
BSJ HEX.’ in the administration office whose speciality was stealing
the rations of the prisoners.
The chief of the political offide in the KZ at this period
was Hauptsturrafuhrer PASIBEhDER. • Subject attended one public execution
of one Pole for escaping find he was hung in the "Austrian" manner by
which subject means accused was strung up and then pulled1 slowly down
by the shoulders causing slow suffocation. The senior SS staff were
present at the hanging and about three thousand prisoners and all
prisoners sang before and after the execution. This incident was
end of 40, beginning 41.
Subject was at FLOSZEWBERG from Oct 42 to Mar 43 ctwhidh
period aiLL was commandant. In the arrest "bau the Gestapo of
REGENSKffiKr detailed subject to act as typist. There was a idle
in the arrest bau who got food every fifth day atj.a subject had to
guard him at night. his .role was a bit mad and would attack
people entering the cell and was slowly dying. Jubject thinks 1®
died in Jan/Peb 43. It was alleged by the Gestapo that he had
killed iJerraan girls. There was a special portable gallows used by
the Gestapo Regensburg which toured the towns in a lorry for executions,
and for refusing to go with it subject was sent back to SAGHSERHAMS®!
﻿maiAv-?.,AXt''tiJ3rt. >
Kansj ms$. msmm/atm
of
Albert il'iCLJUAL of 9 Vribxfceteerstr, FR%i3CFUBT
on 30/2/46.
Subject arrived in . iary ■■«#- K3 on I6/4AO as a
political unreliable of Gcrram mtionalitj havlsiij first been
iii the Jii Jamcsismssai. The eosnanSnnt was dTtirctoannfUhrer
KUJEIM*
Subject; was an electric li^jt laechanic arsi then looked
after the special sueeora founooci by the	which was run
like a erirdnai riuaetea v^ith interesting exhibits, including
handy work of the prisoners, instruaents of escai^e, stats etc*
i'his was a avail carr,: of com 3t000 p.:oj»le at tills
time, mainly for nns and the first foreigners were Ceeeh
Xirisonera from TAUS. Heofit cm» a large transport of Idle®
fton OJUCSti3$Zt and at the em of 1-0 beginning 41 cane the
first consign: errte of Huasimi B/S* These R'/s received specially
bad treatment, lack of food and rainy were injected with HpQo
ceusing death in half a ninute. :.in one occasion the coles had to
stand to attention on the .,ppcLl.-<£>lats for 36 hoprs because one
• ole had escaped.
..he adjutant was Obersterrjfuhi er aut* r-aJEflR, a perfect
bastard who was at KX>j 12SBLSG throughout*
:hci-G was also Hatpteturriftihrer H. AIM3HS who was a
la/jerfuhrer anil vaa known as "the beating neyer" h ing a deman
pun on the name AiaffiXER. fib mis always jiving adverse reports
to the Gestapo on prisoners resulting in their continued detention
in the 3£5*
EUarii-ai, the Gon-anflanfc, went awsy for a iieriod and was
represented by R-ili® who instituted a system of hanging people up
by their hands for hours at a tine. ’bore ms a Bauptetxmifuhrer
BR hTKId in the administration office whose speciality was stealing
tho rations of tee prisoners.
The chief of the political office in the Kg at this period
was iiauptstumfuhrer MSdkv UEH* Subject attended, one public exoc.itioi.
of one * ole for escar-ing and he was hang in the "Austrian” manner \&
which subject mans accused wae strung ui and then pulled slowly uewn j \.
by the shoulders earning slow suffocation. The senior &» staff Vere
present at tlse * tanging and abcait three thousmid prisoners and alx
prisoners Bang before and after the ex. cution. This incident wap
dud of 40, beginning 41*
Subject was at nmmmm tvm Oct 42 to l-iar 43 atehidh
l>eviix± was coir-iaiKifmt. In the arrest bau the batapo of
Kht&KdBUKG- detailed srbjeot to act as typist. There was a Rale
iji the arrest batt who got food ovary fifth dry and subject had to
guard him at night. hi» iUle was a bit nad and would attack
people enterirt; the cell and was sickly coring, Jubjcct thinks lie
died in jan/SMb 43* It wno olle@ad by th>. ‘<.otnpo that he had
killed 'Jortaan girls. here was a special portable :;alJ.or/3 used
the Oestapo Hegenshurg uhidl toured the towns in a lorry for ex-vdtio:
and for refusing tfo go with it subject was sent back to dAOtM^Ud®-,-
in March 43.
..-4
﻿SUBJECT: Edward BIRKEHSTOCK
RESTRICTED
JAfi(WCS)
BAQll/3796/28/A( BS4)
[S PeB 46
fe enclose tTifo copies of a special Interrogation
Report on the above named for information*
It is rep;rett^ yim.....—.
this case cannot be fpiaS branch 1
\	(w.-c,:— —>	1
1 9 FEB 19^6
Ext: 2407	'
Headquarters
British Army of the Rhine
BAOR.
REGIS^ElffiD/UNREGISTERED
previous reference in﻿CONFIDENTIAL
V;
Seventh Army Internee Camp No 79
Ludwigsburg,
APO 753
(Jermany
US Army
Refi SAlC/lIR/251,31 Aug. 45
11 January, 1946
REPORT OF SPECIAL INTERROGATION OF BIRKSNSTOCK, Edward
The only Information the Suspect has regarding English
and Canadian Soldiers at FLOSSENBURG CAMP is as follows!
About the 18 April, 1945» 23 English and American
Officers were brought to the Camp, On the 21 April, 1945,
all of them were again taken away. Suspect did not see or
hear of English and Canadian Soldiers being executed in
the Camp.
JA&OB M. HOLTZMAN
T/4 Interrogator
CONFIDENTIAL﻿SUBJECT: War Grimes: ELOSSENBERG
4|	Lieut I.UCILEL (I.IITQl IELLT~
jag(wcs)
RESTRICTED

4
v
BAOR/3796/2/a(PS4)
i If Reb 46
Ref your BAOR/15228/11/11/JAG dated 14 Dec 45*
1,	Information has been received that Yon LAHOUSM
who is now a General, one of those enumerated on the list
enclosed with the above quoted letter, is held at NURNBURG-
Special Detention Centre in connection with the current
trials.
2.	Lt Col DAVIDSON will make the necessary administrative
arrangements for the interrogation of this man if this is
desired.
Ext: 2407
Headquarters
British Army of the Rhine
BAOR.
/mb

Colonel, PS.
REGISyS^ED/umSG-ISTERM)
v﻿8S,500Lifts. 49796/4897. 3/4.
j MEMORANDUM
ARMY FORM C348
(Lifts of 100 in duplicate)
(Large)
Sender’s t ence	f'.e
_______________;_____________
From .....................>
Receiver’s Reference
Date
/ "X ?*&>
TO

.ETA
V».
U-eJLvUv...^O-T-Z-...
l^r IXA©

'3ib...................................................n/d
Vs-c>
..﻿■■H

U.b. WAR CRU^L LIAISON LbTACHI^NI
HLALQUARTLES BRITISH ARMY OF THL IHINA

6 February 1946.
ACID Itr 1326.
SUBJECT! FLOSSr-RBURG Concentration Camp (BAOR/15228/11/A).
TO	: Leputi Theater Judge Advocate
War Crimes Branch,
United States Forces, Luropean Theater,
AFO 633, U. S. Army.
1.	Inclosed herewith are notes of interrogation of Albert
CHBIBTLX, a former inmate of FLOssKNBUEG, and explanatory letter
from Fa3or G. I. Draper, dated 5 February 1946.
2.	Attention is invited to paragraph 3 of the inclosed
letter with reference to Major Draper's opinion as to the use
and accuracy of CHRlbTEL as a witness.
3.	Attention is also invited to paragraph 4. It is re-
quested that an attempt be made to get the information desired
as to the personalities engaged in the murder of British per-
sonnel at the Camp.﻿zr
MooJ) Jy;'
^ Ovt- QCICj.l (j-C *<3
' tf \u}*r[ pn^
i﻿UA V vIEUX 04236	‘p«	«P«'
FROM ADJAG 1 CORPS DISTRICT 041300Z
TO DJAQ CWAR CRIMES SEC ) EXFOR
BT


1C/JAQ/Q14 • RESTRICTED • ROBERT LEVT^O DETMOLDER STR ^	f"''' j ""
SCHLANQEN LAND LIPPE IS A SURVIVOR FROM TREBL1NKA AND MAIDANEK
CONCENTRATION CAMPS . RUSSIAN PROSECUTION AT NURNBERQ RECENTLY
SAID THEY HAD ONLY JggjMBEX DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE Op THESE
CAMPS
BT.^-1300A
AMEND SECOf^^DA,
PMP B﻿most/153
'JAG.
kar 4S*
Bri^L A.-'-r Oriaes xeoutive,
HBHSMffiSG.
(For oTi-vard ty'ansrniseloa to the
Fusaian ^roeeottfelon.)
lafasraatlon. has svtMdMd thle OffSen ftp** 4»B.J»A*@*» X Corps
Sietriet satfiny, that Fobort i/vVI» >6 TP^WTF.tw STPA^HE* SCFLAlfG' .S.
T^igrj.rpp-^ .la a survivor fn» the Goodnuitmtien Cmt^* 'SKlh.ijjMA and
itemiffis.
•Sbs BuEKiscn Pf^tsacwtieo a* WIRi-><3?3«G reoently said that
thsy hail aaiy dooumsstarF wMoaija of thase oak^s. li‘ o**y li^e
witusaaes are mated* the ahov* menticKied aessas to have «Pf»s?ed
hi* jsai^tariea.
Group Cfeptain,
Legal Fteff.
ijit. 262a
JAG'S BI-iiKGH (^GS)
ifc BACK.﻿; ;T^XCT 0
Aj^4}
cel. J. IKfSAMMBf
liftfion : "JTltlsshj
ar arises much, u
mroti
usjeet;	®r frrise®
’lecseaeurg onaanir ticjo
1*	1 snoleee * letter whicii j. mnt on tte 1? jeruar^ to. the
76 oetloo ,ub,
2* ‘phis let er he e Just cove o*ck t tele o Pico with the
IrsfoneitlM that oe trace of this wait can ho found la this theatre.
i. The only i*i w .stlw. on the	ct which j can f^nd o aeo
from vquKdron cffioer Aitbeaa who hem recently b «n to ;>\C: u#
It ie that it* cel. Joseph ?. ef the jeflealAwiaB An^ le tmiog
held at the :*riasui lotcrrcfivti a ( ntre at MC l* At the
noaeet he ie in posaee.nioa of a treat t-eal ol' infem feion and h e
seen an Insets of tne roneeot atioo c«av» and it would eeocr eery
likely that he is the penson referred to in that tele; riot.
far
"-roup Tapfeain
iegel taff
xt; 2628
’AC*e orandi ! «r crimes eotion
M..., fi '
mamrnwn/w m
( neloeurej*
sms/heh
copy toj it cel a. . pniey
iv . nr ertamn . iaie-vc eu﻿3OC/ JAG/GEN. 26
Tel Ext: 140,141,34/.
/5
J.A.G's Branch,
HQ 30 Corps District,
23 Mar 46
fflossenburg Concentration Gamp
Herewith statement by Leopold GORDON
at present in CIC Sandbostel received from
GSI this HQ.
As mentioned in letter of even reference
and date, Subject: Sachsenhausen Concentration
Camp it;is proposed to release this man
shortly.
A.D.tJ .A.G.
30 Corps District.
SRH/AF
Jag branch
26 MAR 1946
REF.: -------......
HQ BRITISH ARMV
OF THE RHINE﻿RESTRICTED,
U.S ar Crimes Liaison Croup,
BAOR/15228/11/1
r »
o Mar k-6 i
Subject: - FLOSMEIIBURC Concentration Cajap. ^ -j ^ j
Kerctrith a statement in respect of the a/n Camp.
The writer Leopold GORDON is in British custody at No. 2
f*
2. --------------------------------------- ----------
C.I.C. Please inform this office if you require his transfer.
'24,
Ext: 2446
JAG*s Branch (War Crimes Section)
HQ B.A.O.R.
Enclosure.

Group Captain,
Legal Staff.
﻿

>-■ Si
U.C. '.^1. CHI t........:Jl..I-v’W Cii^ :.,*i
Hi’Lb.: liHIiiliia Aiflf if till!- Otkitik.
1 April 1945
WOLD Itr. 1936
S uuJHCT: FUJ^KiN UHil (.i.H0R/l58g8/ll/1^JAS)
TO	; Deputy Thattor re Advocate,
War Crimes Branch,
United States Forces, European Thenter,
AtO 633, U.o. Army $
\. Reference letter OLD 1326 from this dot ctaient, doted 6 feb-
rUfiry 1345, forward!nr notes of interaction of Albert Cr,'d ill*, -nd
perejjraph 4 thereof in o-rticul; r.
2, Bauotfturafuehrer Dr. Heinrich -’U'f-, Dent! t t ilos^enbern,
ia no- tael : ot British PZ CIO. Instruction; -re re ueetod «a to inter-
ro -stion or fu ther disposition.
|*0h iut CO	OFiiCSH:	'}
cc JAG/»CS (M jor Ste-• rt)
﻿
U .3 * VAR CRUCS KAXSCK DET.lGIl'X;!'?
Hl’A&'-UARr.X 3 BRITISH AERY OF TrX RHIKE
4 April 1946

OLD lir
SUBJECTa
TO i
1960
FLO'3SNBUJC Goncentrtion Camn.
Deputy The-ter Judge Advocate
Tar Grices Branch
United Tteto:- Forces, Sur:.- ear. Theater
APC 633, u.3. Army
JAG BR.i]vcf|
(War Cf!mc3 Section)
9
REF.;
APR 194P
h%Dns" A^y
nag Rhine
1. Forrardad her®«dt> for such action ■ s may be deemed
appropriate is a st tecect concerring the FI/OSSlSilUJ^ Coacan-
tration Caissp.
Tha writer Leopold GO! DO!, is in British custody at
La .^Clvili-n Intemsent cheap.
3. Inetructione ro r& u- .;ted ae t. .ni ..r this rau* is
to :>e tranef erred xo U.3. '"one.
ccj
For r"; OOLl»KD.f|6 .FFIGEKj
dHG’g :.rRnch/'C3/:'- HP.A
(your lir B-ArTiA;::%/i 1/
llZ7Ac7~&td 30 Ear 46,,.,Z
refers)
. IVY
Gapt, F•A *,
Txeoutire.
﻿' Subject:- Alleged Vfar Crimlnr-ils
(War Grimes)
BACH
INT/950/P/<U^or.
-1,	Enclosed herevidth are papers relating to the u/m internee,
who is alleged to he of Gar Criminal interest.
NAME; M dW.dYtfiUP'T	Held in No A- OIC
®MAEKS:
'^Vvv-eate.ct IS ^ cn) •4^’
MSflO-R/'S'iqW/ ft (PS4) -do-'chsl 3 Cdr 4S'
jag	|
(War Cnm a Soction)
'ML !
HQfBRITISifi A: MV	|
Or THE R' iN;
2.	Any correspondence relating to this case should he address
Int Bureau CCG/bE quoting the above reference.
Ext 129
HQ 1 Corps District
ISERLOHN
W Apr 1+6
mdhs/mr
\	■ Lt-Gen
Commander, N Corps Dist
(Lt N.D.K. SELF)
Ml
ft﻿* I
pril 46.
aison p»
U. . war crioes Liaison
a _____________
ar crimes.

Subjectj PIO ' ■ 1131'ijG Coneontz-aUon Qa-,.,,.
1« wuruwith ad'.issiors by UITHAUT in
respect o- the a/n cai^> for our perusal.
2. whan you return the documents could
you kiridly inforra. this office as to whether
you wish ■’UL"" U T to be transferred to
-y
/ / Group cas tihn.
Legal s aff.
/no's Bvatioh { ar crimes section;
U ■ i.h.C.R. Arty er‘ the Qhine.﻿U*B* hAJi GH1MB8 LIAISOS USfACiiMilHf
::UAD^IjAR'SUiQ BRITIOH A&M'x 01 fHS HHIBK
24 April 1946
AGLi) Itr 2086
OUMKOft I'LOxB:, BUHG Conoontratlon Camp
?ritz miMllAHW
20 s iieputj I’heater Judge Advocate f
i.'ar Crises Branch#
United dtatos forces# -uropean f heater#
UO 655, U*S. Army.
1.	ad Is an ateiesion U,, GlifSAGIf in respect of
the FLOC8BS.BUBG Concentration Camp, and copy of the arrest
report.
2.	Instructions are requested aa to whether .cULTHaUPT
is to be franeferrou to U.3. Con©.
FOR flip C0W.1AiNDI.ia OlllCPkj
LMS8 li IVY,
Capt #, 1. . *
Sxsouiive.'
2 Incls: §)
b)
Copy of Arrest Report
Copy of statement by MSMIWUIV.
,0 PR’NCtl
ar Crtm s ‘ , '
27 APR 1946;
........... 1
-> RHITISH At u*
coi J.3.0/pC.l~your letter BAGi-i/l5228/11/11/JAG
dtd 17 Apr 46 rol’ers. Pnclosureo thereto
returned herewith. Yiiis Dstachmeiit is
retaining on® copy of etatem«mt.﻿
w
sTrx
ARREST REPORT.
M
MULTHADPT.
SURNAME.
ALIAS....—
NATIONALITY CLAIMED '
.. FIRST NAME (s)
German.
Fritz.
address OF last residence . I'Tiisenstr. 3» Bad Salzalfen.
occupation Kripo Inspector.
IDENTITY DOCUMENTS	.........
Bad Salzulfen.
.. .(c) TIME
DETAILS OF ARREST: (a) PLACE
(b) DATE 1? Nov 45
UNIT MAKING ARREST	33 FSS................................
REASON FOR arrest . Staff of Concentration Camp Flossenberg,.
Authority for arrest BAQB/379.6/A(PS4) dated, 3 Oct.............45....
(further details to be written on back if necessary)
WITNESSES: NAMES AND ADDRESSES.......—...............................
statement after arrest Admits above, stcteiBent attached.......................
^attach on separate sheet if necessary)
NOV id46.;	*
PROPERTY: (Property taken from prisoner to be listed on back, together \yitp SMcription andWi^‘
whereabouts of any other property relevant to the casei^5^/£X£Tb
MILITARY OR CIVIL AUTHORITY TAKING CUSTODY OF THE PRISONER
_ W?
..............Internment ..Camp No, 4...
Signature of person authorising arrest.,,.
Date 13 NOV 45.........................
AG P B R—15 OM—2 6811AB CD—5-t+l+
33 FSS
SHAEF AGO Form No. 7﻿present
At Lemgo 15 Oct 45
\ . Fritz Multhaupt
Criminal-secretary	\
Bad Salzuflen	•	,
.0 •	.. 'o ' .	1	v' :
!
lippische landesregirung
land®spolizeidirector
DEIMOLB
Subj . My delegating to the concentration-camp Flossenhtlrg
Ref. Order of the lippische lard esregierung-Landespolizeidirector
Alt.Cd.Bo.366/45"
On summons I declare as follows:
At first I declare that I have been examined in this matter as well
by ximerican as by British authorities resp. that I had to declare
myself by writing about all circumstances. At last two gentlemen of
the British Secret-Service fro m Be mold, assi ted by Mr. peter
Rbmer interpreter, were in my office at Bad Salzuflen and haVe
ashed me in this matter by word of mouth. I handed over to these
officials my written declaration and since that time I did not hear
anything concerning this subject. This was May 1945, I don’t knwo
where the respective report are now.
Concerning the matter:
ii
October 8th 1943 the Burgermeister of Bad Salzuflen, then my supe-
rior handed over to me an order according to which I. was to be
detached to the concentration-camp Flossenburg/Oberpfalz the 10.10.
43. This order came from the Rei/chssic^erheitshauptamt at_Berlin
via Kriminalpolizeileits'telle Hannover, to which I then pertained as
a msmber of the municipal Kriminalpolizei, to the Burgomeigter. From
the first moment I resisted in my heart against thig charge. But ■
I could not oppose against it as I then would be.summond to trial -
before a SS- and police-court j, There was no statement in the, order,
with what sort of service I was to be charged at Flossenburg. This
was communicated to me at my arrival, when I had to report myself
at the commander of the camp, SS-Obersturmbannfiihrer Max Koegel,for
beginning my service. He declared to me that I had to relieve the
criminal-secretary Willy Fassbendsr from the Kriminalpolizeileit-
stelle Cologne, who was »5 years as a criminal-offical in the con-
centration-camp Flossenburg. I was detached to department II for
service. My occupation 'was the administration of the acts of the
prisoners, admittance and dismissal of prisoners, removing .to the
Y/ehrmacht and the settling of matters from other authorities for
instance divorce- and alimony-matters. I had only to handle with--^
pure administration-affairs.
' I had nothing to do with the guarding oZ'the prisoners. This was
performed by ‘ two companies faffen-SS, which pertained also to the
camp-commander.
Leader of the concentration-camp was the Hauptsturmfiuxr :r Fritseh,
camp-surgeon Sturmbahnfuhrer Drfmed. Schnabel.
I already mentioned that I resisted in my heart against all what﻿<rn3mm
fv
^ % •
happened, in a concentration-campj I therefore went iyt 'the coir 8$, r
two days after my arrival and declared to him that Twalg not . .Uv^ed
for a concentration-camp. I also declared that I was' sick arid I could
not agree with the diet of the camp by reason of an operation of the
stomach.
I was then examined by the camp-surgeon Dr. Schnabel. 1 also told him
my foaling and it seemed that im would appreciate my situation and
reported in my favour about my state of health. Attaching his report
D re-quested for my removal to the ' Sicherheitshauptamt at Berlin. But
it lasted- till the end of February when 1 was relieved by the Kriminal-
oberassistent Konrad Blomberg from the municipal hriminalpolizei at
Bielefeld. I will also mention that I left no stone' unturned in these
four months for getting out of the camp. So I wrote songs letters to my
comrade, Kriminalsekrctar Meier , Bad Salzuflen and begged that he
night cause the burgerm ister caring for my reentering my former ser-
vice via KriminaTpolizei'leitstelle Hannover by stating that ho could
not perform alone all the service. I even wrote to the leader of the
Kriminalp©lizeileitstelle Hannover, Oberregierungsrat Linnemann, him-
self and did not conceal that I would perish morally if I had to stay
longer at Plossenbiirg. .
At' last I will mention that I wore at first in the camp my civil clo-
thes while all others members of the Waffen-S8 wore uniform. It seeded
that the camp-leader did not agree that I was the only civilian in the
camp. He therefore caused that I had to go to Berlin, Bsfcl .idungskammer
of the Sicherhfcitspolizei.'/hen returning from Berlin to Flossenburg I
visited my family at Salzuflen for two days. It is very probably that
1 then was seen by some perspns who are not inclined .to me by reason
of my office. They now propagate the. rumour in denouncing me in a low
manner that I was member of the Gestapo or of the SS. )"
L declare herewith once more that I became member of the EfSDAP in 1938
but that I was never an active member and that I had no office. I be-
longed neither to the S3 nor to the SA, nor was I a member of the
Gestapo. But I belonged before and during my service as a police-man
to 'the Free-Trades-Uwion, before 1933- At last I was member of the
Schrkder-Verein, cancelled/;after 1933.
I can even now appoint trustworthy and reliable men as witnesses for
my political opinion, with whom I imdertained years ago against'the
Nazi-system. I denominate especially the actual Felice- major August
Jeuschede, leader of the police, Detraold with whom I was in active .u . ;
service before 1933 at De‘mold and whom I visited often after 1933*
He can witness that I was never a follower of the'nazis.
I was no official of the Gestapo^ that shows the fact that I belonged
from—1^23 to 1936 to the uniform-wearing .police and was then removed
tojth.: Kriminalpolizei Bad Salzuflen. There 1 was continously at ser-
vice and 1 belong to it continously since 1936. This will be seen from
my personel-acts. At present I.am detached for Lemgo for service. That
is all what I have to say in this matter.
(Sgd)﻿U.S. MR CRBCES LIAISON DETACHMENT
HEADQUARTERS BRITISH ARLY OF THE RHINE
17 May 1946
000.5 (TWB:bb)
YiJCLD Itr 2236
SUBJECT: FL03SENBURG (BAOR/15228/h/a/JAG)
TO : Group Captain A.G. SOMERHOUGH
Chief, War Crimes Section
Judge Advocate General's Branch
Headquarters British Army of the Rhine
1.	United States War Crimes Branch has advised that Hauptsturmfuehrer
Dr. Heinrich FUTZ, dentist at Flossenburg, now held at No. 2 Civilian Internment
Camp, is not wanted by the United States in connection with the Flossenburg
case.
2.	No information has been received thus far concerning the alleged
murder of British personnel in the camp.﻿tr.U MH CRI^JiS LIAISON BKACiil
H£AD«UAHTEKS BfilTISli AMI 01 THE RHINE
i
) ’■
16 May 1946
ICLD Ltr £250
SUBJECT: Trsnefer of War Crimes Suspects to U,c. Zone («'Cb 98-71)
Tu : A{ PS 4), Heack.uert ere British Artsy of the Rhine.
1. Reference letter BA0R/,,796/6Sl/A(.r>S.4) , subject: Location o?
Suspects, dated 14 D' ceK.ber 1945 and our ACLL letter 1614 to U.S. War Criir.es.
Branch, dated 87 February 1946, copy of which was forwarded to your branch.
8. U.S. War Crimes Branch has advised that the following persons are
no longer wanted for any purposes by American authorities:
BALA, Ernst>
EQGERS, Hel<>;a
PABST, Wilhelm Karl Willi
3. No further action is desired
(War Crtnw* «•««§«>
2} (MY 1948
*£«=.>
War Crim.es Section,JAG, B, 6AGR﻿:n.: -	.»»■ ■ iKKU^snsi ?'—c 4-v*' ! ‘T’
0 l,H4
“a.
,
•	. •	' ’	: ■	'	w .
vl>	a. w i-fiiXxXwA- fii-lii* X wX*	X ^.s .<	^ ■ '-■
4 Jimu 194 f
•CLD Itr 2484
:n,	Concentration Camp
•3UBJ CT
Depute Theater Jufipe • rtvoento
tear Crimes r.ranch.
ilted e tat cm Force a* .vrovea;! Cheateo
F-.C f:39, U..	-.r, v
1.	lt.V 1 ,	'H 1	9
j®et *s » ov , for. rdl u ........‘ Wt xt ky mml m% ■
X0BI50H coneorninp the 10 c;	3 »»♦
2. S®1B0S is in Iritish cuatoly At o. 2 civil:
Intern,'-: «.• at Ga .
p. Xftfitrue lo are ac&in requested ao to
or not this - on Is ^	^
﻿Subject:- War Grimes - FLOSSMBUBG-
Concentration Gamp Trial.
BA0R/37711/906/A(PS Jf)
JAG (WCS)	^ June 46
Herewith letter Log No. 192 Case No. 12 - 1380
dated 28 May A6 received from DTJAG War Crimes Branch
through Lt. Col. WOODBURN v/hich is forwarded to you for
information and necessary action.
5his letter refers to the Trial of FLOSSBNBURG
Concentration Carap Case by a General Military Government
Court at DACHAU commencing on or about 12 June 194°»
Extn 21+07.
Headquarters
Brutish Amy of the Rhine
back
/JBK
KEGSgTBIMyUNREGISTERED
wr


MM'﻿HFB/cmf
/
Log No. 192,
Case No. 12-1380
28 May 1946
SUBJECT:	Trial of FLOSSENBURG Concentration Camp Case.
TO
Commanding Officer,
British War Crimes Liaison Detachment,
Deputy Theater Judge Advocate's Office
APO 633, U.S. Army.
1.	This will advise you that approximately fifty-two (52)
major perpetrators in the Flossenburg Concentration Camp Case,
who are accused of acting in pursuance of a common design to sub-
ject thousands of civilian nationals and members of the armed
forces of nations then at war with the then German Reich to kill-
ings, beatings, tortures, starvation, abuse and other indignities,
will be tried by a General Military Government Court at Dachau,
Germany, commencing on or about 12 June 1946.
2.	Inasmuch as some of your nationals were involved as vic-
tims of atrocities alleged to have been committed by the accused,
and because of the importance of this proceeding, it is believed
that the trial will be of interest to your government. Accordingly,
you are invited to have present throughout the course of the trial
observers from your nation, who, because of the limited facilities,
^necessarily must not exceed two (2) in number.
3.	Adequate accomodations will be made available for the
messing and quartering of your representatives at Dachau and it
is requested that not later than three (3) days prior to the date
the court will convene for the trial of the case the War Crimes
Branch, Third U.S. Army, be notified of the names of the two (2)
observers who will be present at the trial and the expected date
of their arrival there*. Notification should be made to:
War Crimes Branch,
Headquarters, Third U.S. Army
Post Dachau,
APO 205, U.S. Army.

Telephone WIESBADEN 8?0?
Deputy﻿
U.S. WAR CRIMES LIAISON DETACHMENT
HEADQUARTERS BRITISH ARMY OP THE RHINE
WCLD Itr 2570
SUBJECT:	FLOSSENBURG Concentration Camp (BAOR/l5228fll/ll/JAG
TO	: Judge Advocate General's Branch
War Crimes Section
Headquarters British Army of the Rhine
1.	Reference your letter dated 50 March 1946, subject
and file number as above, and enclosure thereto.
2.	US War Crimes Branch has advised that no necessity
exists for the transfer of Leopold GORDON as a witness in
connection with the FLOSSENBURG Concentration Camp.
5. Returned herewith, statement by GORDON in respect
to above mentioned Camp.
Incl: as stated par 5«
g>﻿jm
■
U.S. WAR CRILiSS LIAISON DETACHMENT
HEADQUARTERS BRITISH ARMY OP THE RHINE
ihmbhhhbmhhhhhh
12 June 1946
WCLD Itr 2570
SUBJECT: FLOSSE®BURG- Concentration Camp (MOR/15228/1 l/ll/JAG)
TO : Judge Advocate General*0 Branch
War Crimes Section
Headquarters British Army of the Rhine
1.	Reference your letter dated 30 March 1946, subject
and file number as above, and enclosure thereto,
2.	US War Crimes Branch has advised that no necessity
exists for the transfer of Leopold GORDON as a witness in
connection with the S’LOS SEN BURG Concentration Camp,
3.	Returned herewith, statement by GORDON in respect
to above mentioned Camp,
Incl:
as stated par 3
GEORGE W. HALEY
Lt Colonel CMP
Commanding﻿TRAUSLATION
Gordon, Leopold 350753
Concentration camp of Flossenburg.
Vkn the 16th of September 1940 I was committed to the Floseenhurg
c^Rntration camp as a political prisoner. At my arrival in the camp
I was received with heatings, and the next day I was assigned to the
work detail in the quarry, were I was exposed for nearly three years to
heavy work and mistreatments from the SS. I can now report something about
this terror I lived through which I shall never forget. I myself once re-
ceived 25 lashes from Oberschafuhrer GRUBERj from Untersturmfuhrer SCHIRHER
I received once 20 lashes with a rawhide whip because I had lost the heel
iron from my right wooden shoe. Schaifuhrer ABEL always had a dog along and
set the dog on inmates frequently. Abel was known as one of the most feared
detail leaders. It was his hobby to thrash us inmates with the dog whip.
Unterscharfuhrer WINKLES beat me with a wooden club in such a manner that
blood was streaming from my mouth and nose, the reason being that Winkler
found a roll of chewing tobacco on me when he conducted a search. I saw
how other inmates particularly Jews , were driven into the guard chain and
then shot by the guards. In the year 1942 only 8 Jews were left in the
camp.
In the night from the 14th to the 15th of June 1941 we were awakened
At 2 AM by the block leader and driven to the roll call place with sticks
and blackjacks. We only learned at the roll call place what was the matter;
two Piles had escaped; all block leaders as well as the commandant and the
camp leader were present; the Poles had to stand formation all by them-
selves and atand at attention and they were being worked over with black-
jacks while standing at attention by the block leader who also kicked them.
The camp leader AUMEIER ordered the German and Czech inmates to go th their
blocks to fetch blankets. Except for the Poles all inmates were permitted
to bring blankets to the roll call place. At 8 Oclock in the morning an
order came that all inmates except the Poles were to go th their blocks
and remain there. After the Poles had stood at attention for 36 hours the
two escaped Poles were brought baek in the camp as corpses with an auto.
The heads had been severed from both and shown to the Poles at the roll
call place. After standing at attention for 36 hours the Poles were dis-
missed, 47 bodies remained on the roll call place.
It happened frequently that inmates escaped; all inmates had to re-
main standing on the roll call place until they had been brought back to
the camp dead or alive. If he was brought alive he received a sign on
which it said I am back from my recuperation furlough, at the camp gate.
When the escaped inmates came back into the camp, the inmates band played
and he had to walk around the whole roll call place so that all inmates
could see him. After this ceremony he would be placed over a block in the
center of the roll call place where he was beaten with two rawhide whips
on the buttox until the camp phjtsican in attendance would order it stopped;
I myself have counted once in such a case 75 lashes.
It was on a Sunday in July 1941. All we inmates had to stand formation
on the roll ca.ll place; report leader Oberecharfuhrer SCHMATZ made the follow-
ing speech: Germany now finds itself also at war with Russia . Do not hope
for Germany to lose the war. Schmatz' said further: and if we should really
lose the war, I shall have"left enough time to set up a machine-gun, to light
a cigerette and shoot all of you before hand. All this Schmatz said in a speech
to about 5000 inmates.
In June 1943 I came with a transport of prisoners to Dresden where I
had to work building barracks. In October 1943 I c^me with a transport from
Dresden to castle Hirschstein which was in the vicinity of Meissen. We had to
fence in the castle with barfeed wire and to build a guardhouse. I saw once how
scharfuhrer ABEL set his dog which he always had with him, on three Italian
- 1 -﻿inmates and when the three inmates took more and more protection from the
dog in a nearby lying woods, all three of them were shot by Abel and a
^ rottenfuhree.
tin Flossenburg a rifle range had been set up next to the crematory and
myself witnessed .1000 Polish inmates being shot there. I frequently saw
osed autos drive into the camp and civilians get out who were led to the
rifle range by the SS and	shot there. Humors in	the camp had it that the
civilians were all Czechs	who had been	brought	by car. The shootings of	in-
mates were undertaken in most cases in the evening; when they did S5X take
place during the day when we were in the blocks we received the order from
the block eldest to lie down on the floor with the face down so that none
would be able to look out	of the window	to see something. When the shootings
took place in the evening	I saw from my	bed the	block leaders lead those	who
were to be shot to the rifle range.
/S/ 350753 Gordon Leopold﻿
&/>
3 5#? S3	-/


'fZ&A
'P '? i£y‘’ ■^-■e &	^t^e-uC/y^*^ 'ft**? ^***«i*U *+±*€y^&. ritofc&i
^U-/ yZcZA/y 3 sf&Jfys ^y^rUj ^M-/f.4£sJ&'y„<s >•	irJ^Pgf/
^Ct4 y	sptfrp* *0/44	G***#^^ sy*y <44C&*.
yStr/t y&f *£*&4	'7'^ *$y&?spp«&*jf*>/•**	flpfr'i<Pp$J£,-
^A£>**yy**y y^t4f*stf	y&#f yjjy^y
23^44^4
**'*? y*«++»*x*£
s4y*fJ>4 *t+**y y++t£*+**•*	^4* "-tss<*y •'**4 'iy&*pt
^yyi js++i-/'•'**** 'Yy^/y'ffis&'-ytyd y* s&/4%'i
4^/4^ .	'4^7-t^y y4£jJ yji+ejrf/ff
iz'^J^ry,'i74:r/>	.«/s^.
-* ’y ygt'/^f
1
/■iSyA-e-rt/gy+t^f^■* -£ -- - -	■-'••	' ' •



y/-	,	. 'tfaU^UASJw ^jAst
sn. - ■
/'$+?■&*&' s&’A'f-Syft/ p4&fcSf rffyWW	.*/ jfi > J *
<Vy^^Ty0,J^	s ' j
y£	<4*Sy„yy,^	^ ./^v/ ^ /
I
I
44*r*,SSs^-	, y U	I
f * ' *<<?*7'*	,	. v . 7 I
^S^JsSs.e	.:tw^j^\
yt-.i-t 11# *pb&L,y, sf'/.A /-iy

- . y.
■-V^V'- -/ 5?^-



I
i ''***~ {y^^/yy y(M? yy-.f. y//' ,j/7-fsy ^/..^ rP^z#/*,,
vxf
1*$*pp*‘
I
Mi﻿^	Sf- S/C**-*** ''/t?t/
'//yWs? ^♦*-*^-»-- 2^	■v/st?'?'? sd?/'-*'''**
y^iy(4 At/sf-f/VA!>/s^i^'
se?A?*'r
s&Wsf s<?/-r7? c^ysyf^^ar*ifa- .	«-
sy^jyyr	'U/sfr/yy^z
s-e?/^??h 4y	d''* y? ^-fy-ty'-/-/'
j/Xt'Cf y*^syy\ y?/*fyt'ySS'+yy?/^ s&fcy
^'£?/- X/Cf ^h?y ^ifyyy/X .ys-y^/’y-'^'*— yf/^yCyyyfXr*--
~*XXt'&/	jj/y/dsy S'*? yf~ yf/yj
9	/ v
sX'fa'tf/fjyXs*++~~ ^'7--*' ? s7* 7^ Xpt^T s-rrr** d***r ~*X^^^P S*^
{/X^yysXvrXJpfy 'yU?'** -up/y*** %syZ(7*e^^rr,4*ryy ^gy/y/dj/l/ss^-
yy^fX^/^/yryf ^s^X^yy'yf	^/y^p^*^
/t/ytr^y Xy^*— ^*XXrt?/ 'fo'c4jy/Xyy/y^*~ ^XXiy&y^X^^^
^•''*” zfy&yyfw yf^T^y^y^*	st/fy/y^-
X?'**’ "-£J&yyKty,	^y?/y^%.	^tztffsr^y'**—
yP/yt*^	y€>p-/tt yf^ysyCyyy/y?# >t,Xyyyfy.~-*--*~-	*ff
^ L/.'frX’yf ^rtprpn	J^y^/tyyf^ y?/se0uf y?{s£/st
^0£i&jifM's**'*^,y y?Ai*&fy4 y?fy^i rf?y>+/y*^*-~ y&0*t'y£ yp/y****
j/tyZyy'^y	~y^y*-**-p«~—	y?*-** ^y?/' yy&yy^t **
yfay i4-i 4/y/?yZe%yr-/y'*&~ y?/**Wjtfy^*j //&h4 3 & i$XX?9#/s*+~
yfyXJXjXjJy^ ^ y?/yt yf/yXUy^^ ^rypA&Syfa ■	y?/yy
3 ^f/JXt,'t4.Xsy£*y~ “fer^Sy**^ yP/J% 'fafy	y«'^y^-z-
+*‘fyt**	■>-(JX'f Xj&Oy^ 4$Z0&4 tf0*t£^y;Afi
y vj^ yXvJsyf </' y*yp*y>/ H^yf^yp/y y?/yr? yZX^yy^Mtjy^ ^/y-^t
y^y^y&y-^^py^ ypysefi*#^ S*Xy ^&#£X*yy&7Zy* '#—
^y&lyf^s/y^, y+*-*~- s0/X**yy„/£/+yiyi*<~ ,
^^A^y^syysf'- y~* ^ sf^-	-dyCy^yy**~ s^y*y?
' y-^yp^y*Xy y.﻿
stfs#*'	*■€?/*+*-*	sfj/Ai$«A?'if~ ^C*V ^P/Z&?
S', '/£>	~4?S<S	^/-S-^/%-7'S^S
s?' /f ^--f^Ss*^‘>64f*>&fS?-Sf<»£ * SSS-^ ^^/sf'pSiSAS<t4^
y/s^ sS^^s&rst?/ '£*9#*r*£s*4 p?s^fr<&s4/ h¥<**^^«c s^s^.
j?	s	'	<	-	. dl? A 4	^
sP**+i Jssyp^*'?^'? s&*-*’*'***-**~
S’/ ^S'PS* ,S* 0>+***0*-~
Y^imf

^ 4&C*Ss4>/s£^ sg^^sys*+<r
^sfs^*** sh**'***'&'>'?'*£ ^p/s* ^Sfte****/ys^***+*~
*++*' jfe*?**/ srfyssJS** *&A's
sAt M s/sSAsA'***'***/'*	^-'s*** ^/Aste/
AA***	s^ppsApA&s*? s******^s4 p^ss**»-*~~
,.{P/AA jAS/rl^ -/■> t*?*^}*^S&*&JS**^--* <*>p>$s$** stfSdSs’t**^
^.■f’t^t-i sSA'SS'*'? 'f?S'S^ntsS'^'-* s y^Ap**p*%f <S“$ s+mAfs****
/Ss**~p£ sS’/St^rr ts/ppS^/py*?/^''? *&*+%*?£ y/s«*Pt
/M/4<6m	s&**y % (psJjSsn/ZfS^rtSsf ^4>~
^s^sy'*/^ s?/s*pm	ss^yy^/ p?	.
,fys/r*/f <s?A"t y>/y? //f^f^yy^^/s £%p<e&^&^y
sfsts^s s&t*%yp yAy yyAA^y y.s/a a
^A*****?* *&y J?s* ys>*
.pyy Ayy
(/s 'tMJtsr
* p/^s/ ys' As'sf+yAd



^yyyypjp^
^s?29****'sA»p sM>rt pAyy*yp^<f
^ss/r ^^y^y~s**»~- stf/AA	yAjy&
s^y^pyy^+p A?^p^jpy*Ay44
yyA/s>/s?A AArsf y&/p	<^SmA
/if/yAAysy*i*-t<ysy^syy ^^A-y syy^sp^ /
y Ast /S Ae3^t *‘S// .stJi'j s/'i/rt.y s^y yyyyyy/y ■
s^/s^A*y p ssfy^y^y■/*-'?&' yt/sy
< $/yfsss*	'^yyxfy^y Ay Aa^ s*^/﻿

''2^/s/^-p-S <^^-as^
y2***~	^/yp£//j>4tc^ yZ*.,fy
^?y?	'#*,4py/srsSSx sGA+*s2*y^,*?/^	j^/
\4/&/s&0/yte*	yy**	.
| y/ytf	$££#*+&'*%. e^P'ppr*
ftp## ffi/Jr^A*	‘ptg&t^,
ifep****	y$0j*** +**-*y	y***** ^j^-*—
*it”P°gfcpy	p~~
/e?/-*-{f*S*'S-/‘*-i ‘*W*/S-r -***' .
•/%*i	Sft’i y~~	-^-rS ■**'*<■'■**-
fy^*fjr^,t #'***/>#■'■/'*/■***-, '*>■*'*<' y/S-**S
*-+**-,	'***' 'fi/-'i ‘**-*' ^-t ■&'■?-*'
v/Zs/p/Js**-, tP** '*r’'n'y-SJ', t- sr***'Z ge?#’ -iP1y/Z y^Z-cZc
stf/'f'' 'tS'***’ysZ-S''-*'^-»''*■*? ,py,»rt-y>»-
'jmj $/s*<fz yy^yy^/jts
*y.,,*/ a*^
yjjtz! A***'~’*y ^	aVZaA,
yp«,s~ 'p/y»^	^ ^trC; ' ""v,,
&y>Ss, At-s/ 3 dz^z^>z^.< y*/zy-"*f^ yesy
y# juj /M	«**a*
l^.,	y~~ a/s~* **+/■*'< yyps~f ^**-
^,/g*	m
Jt/Sy S*") '•"*** tS*™, y^**'﻿
s-f


^at—■
^
J?	^	iS+rs*-^,
f*"*'**fi~*-/ ‘ttu*-s4>~rs*>
^ ^<ff
‘P'ytsyy	^^“'^*7 *U<S***r yS^r’ '&€**&*
^ ^ y’s^v/^'^ Jszzz
^>JM	^
yc-'f y^y s*r,y y/s*n	^r,
yys^ ^w	yyy,
y.y-r y+s^t+sy***-	y^,
. jt .	.** -	>» »	._

/0/,y ^/.’t/^yyyy^-,^yg^,,.,^
y&y	’ -
*>/y 0yy^,y^^ ^,-4
ysJAyS'**'#/-/-*-’ y>/y* /4sM'04!/S*ru.44?4+^(^t„	j
-5SS-»»W-	SfCfSl £/tynx*~r JfCfc5«^<*' j﻿SSS8
19 June 1945
|»|
m

J }

w
U .3
Ltr
1st Ind
WAR GRIMES LIAISON' DETACHMENT, HEADQUARTERS
BRITISH ARMY 0? THE RHINE.
Nt
01
TO; A(PS,4) Headquarters British'Army of the Rhine.
1 Attention is invited to basic corrmiunication.
L,mJA-.J.S jf'aanested that authority be granted for the transfer
#rliz	tQ fche u>St Zone f0P trial. U.S. War
Grimes Branch has advised that clearance has been obtained through
GROW GASS .
3.	War Crimes Section, JAG, Headquarters British Army of the
Rhine, has stated that the accused is not wanted by them for trial.
4.	It will be appreciated if letter of authority be issued
In duplicate.
fEpRGE r. HALEY,
It Colonel GMP
Commanding.
CC: JAG/VfCS, in RAQR, your
§﻿, vAa*
I
0
ULFET, I'.J.E CRIKES
FORM NO. 22
DEPUTY THEATER JUDGE SJ.VCCi.TE ’ G OFFICE
WAR CREEL FRANCE
UNITED STATEL FORCLL, EURODE/JI TUEATER
s.po 633
1 ? Jur*	1946
SUBJECT: Delivery of Alleged War Criminals,,
TO
? 1 ESf
: ^a^quarier®»
mtShn AFKY ..r fHS.
1, It is requested that _1
rri tt
to be at»t,r>. M-,. A	--------------—T~
to a point designated oy you for delivery to the United I
trial for the hereinafter described offense.
_______, who is believed
_____ be delivered
states custody for
2. There is evidence that the person requested did, at ____________________
"1 Oa»T'<rurg ____________on or about 51 n ~________________. 19_______» commit
the folio'.mg war crime;**'- U|.^er r.j-^ rlitreat - s''t
3.	The nationality of the person request
4.	The victim(ss (are) of • 1 r ^ ‘	;
ed is ____________________
■ ?5i	1*33 nationality.
r* Give a concise description of the acts \hich constitute the crime.
1951-46﻿m
RESTRICTED.
mm/ttfttz/wium
Jun 46
ACPS.4)
HQ B.A.O.R*
Subject*
Detaclimont letter reference ?€ID letter 2638
dated 19 Jtan 46 addressed to you* copy to this
office*
The a/n v/ho is required by US War
Crimes is in custody in Ho* 4 C.I.C.
Ext* 2446
JAG *s Branch (War Crimes Section), Legal Staff#
HQ B*.A*..0A.------------------------
AV/NB﻿MESSAGE? FOM
BAOR/377il/906/A(PS 4)
25^'30B
PROM: EXPOR
TO: No 4 Civilian Internment Camp,
' RECKLU'IGILiUSEN
A(PS 4) 4l6o(.) Restricted(. ) Inform this HQ soonest if you hold
the following internee wanted for extradition to the American
authorities for Trial for the Murder and Illtreatment of American
and Allied Nationals at FLOSSENBURG in 1944 (.) If you hold
ensure he is not released without authority this HQ (. )
MULTHAUPT Fritz, |f
Copy to:^JAG(V/CS)f Inform this Branch if you have any objection
CIB	to the proposed handover.
War Crimes Liaison Group - for information,
ref your WCLD letter 2638 dated 19 dun 46.
Copy to:- US
iiS WRipiN / ' ,/*/ IN CIPHER
/ ' A
(Capt. Bi®. CANTRELL)

BOP
r;
r ^
/ J
N
R£F.
’ li
2b Jbb
,f * ^ r> f
(Wfsf *
﻿X&0E/1V2284
record o:;’ the above rcent
our Card Index, and consequently cannot put forward any
objection to him being*"S!w«N*»#5*d.02rt>r£lCi3.UGd#
arp^.
2,
Ext: 2628
JAG-’s Brarc> ('•'’•tr Crimes Section)
F'>'.British Amy of the Rhine,
13,.;*.. U. R. /NB
■roup Captain,
Legal Staff.
m
i


﻿﻿iJ-e	-tW prWtduA	^ €&
(Xa/W^. TTAXvtv&oi ,	//£//VA'iJr; /9A.
'€ <
-tl*
k v﻿RESTRICTED*
BAOE/i-aaa/n/u/JAS.
Hjul 46.
A (PS.4)
0
Subject*-	Alberl. 'V fj
Referenca your UOR/3796/64/A(P; 4) dated
12 Jul 46.
i	This office holds no evidence against the
a/n who is in the Automatic Arrest Category and almost
certainly wanted by the Americans,as he was at one tl ie
Commandant of FL0SGBN3ERG Concentration Camp.
2.
with.
Intelligence Cufeau file is returned here-
i-K
JAfi’s Branch (War Cri es Sec),
Group Captain,
Legal Staff.

Enclosure.
M/JP
VQ﻿Subject: FLOSSSHBURG	RESTRICTED
Concentration Camp
baqr/3796/97/ A(PS4)
Lt»Gol.XT.S.',,oo<3bum>	/3 Aug 46
AAG Liaison (British),
q/o war Orfces Branch,
IB Army,
US APO 633
1.	Attached at .Vpp:c, is a nominal roll of persons
held in Civilian Interment Camps in this lone on account
of their connection vdth the above camp.
2.	Will you plea e of-er these people to US War Crimes
Branch and infora this EQ whether that Branch has any
further interest in them.﻿iiEPX "A" to BADR3796/97A(PQ!f)
%
SURNAME •
Christian
Name
RANK
Date of.	GIG where
Birth	now held
y
i^GNlTSSEW
■ AHRENS
. WEHRMANH
~!t/////// -VOGEL
f HEESCH
r4 f
iiartin
Theodor Johannes
Johannes Otto
KarJ
Karl Friedrich
I/Cpl	5«5.08
’Jachimnn	18.9« 88
Oscharfuhrer	18.7« 97
ffeuptscharfuehrer	10.5-46
SS-iiann	10. 6.11
No 1 CIC
No 6 CIC
n
fi
n﻿RESTRICTED.
BAOR/15228/ll/llZJi
29 Aug 46
Netherlands War Crimes Liaison Group,	|
c/o Allied Missions Gamp,	\
HQ BAOR,
Stib^ects War Crimes.
I am sorry I forgot to include this Charge
Sheet in the papers I sent you the other day*
Ext; 2446
JkG's Branch (WCS),
HQ BAOR.	____
Group Captain,.
Legal Staff,
0 i/c War Crimes Section*
(Major S.K. STEWART).
Enclosure.
REGISTERED / UNREGISTERED
APO / SDS.
SMS/NB﻿24 Ootober 1946
3. CRCMCAS3 state
ent held at Oas^) 5Q
be
the
Konrsd. KCS <i£N is at pres—
U*S* Authorities please
tiie mm formvly on
HAL
ilonel.
Deputy,
J. ,G.
W/JAG/rS/21/58
004- .L ■	^ -1 »1
Army
Accused;
Kasai
Concentration Cs®f»,
•lutfeoriijw earlier 11119
1.	The trial of personnel of
it is believed* wes held by the U.S.
year.
2.	It is believed that one KCSSBS my be one of the aroused
not known to be in custody at the tiae of the trial, but in
view of the fact that this office holds no evidence concerning
this ma the following infonar.tion received free OHSAa; say
be useful to the U.S. Authorities.
-	War Crimas
FL0S3af5Em Cenoentratlon Gwsp.﻿
'JIV PawJI-
Subject...................
BA0R/i>79^/VA(PS 4)
JAG (was)
---------	<fs H4f.
1.	Herewith Intelligence Bureau file on the above. namea'^C,, ' m
internee, who appears to be of ¥ar Criminal Interest,
«
2,	If you are interested in this person will you retain
the file until you have taken whatever action you think necessary.
3. If on the other hand you are in a position to clear this
subject will you please return the file to this Branch together
with a clearance attached to it.
4.
Xle have no trace of this subject in our records.
A'
Ext 2407.
Headquarters
British Amy of the Rhine
BAOR
/JBK
EEGISTERED/lMIIEGISliEED.
\ Brigadier
A \ a(ps)
(Capt. MP CANTRELL'
J «
(War ;
25 OCT Ig
.........
> BRITISH a s
I﻿
ESTRICTED,
A (

BAOR/I5228
28 Oct 46.
SUBJECT;	Paul WEIN



Reference your BA.aft/3796/71A/A(PS4) of 26 Oct 46.
We have no record of the above mentioned- on our Card
Index, and consequently cannot put forward any objection to him
being released.
*‘ile returned herewith.
E xt• 2628
JAG's Branch (War Crimes Section),
RQ B. A.O.R. ___________—---------—
0 i
-hUx"Group Captain
0 Legal Staff

Enclosure﻿I
'

Subject! Postal Intercept
BAOR/WC/s/28
5 Nov 46
To:	DtTAG (WGS)
/
The attached postal intercept received from
A(PS4) is forwarded.
Lt Col
Tel: 2248
HQ BAOR
BAOR '
Commanding
War Crimes Investigation Unit
(Lt Col RA NIGHTINGALE)﻿RESTRICTED

U.S. CIVIL CENSORSHIP SUBMISSION
CIVIL CENSORSHIP DIVISION, USFET
Date of commun: ’
Date of postmark:
26 Aug 46
28 46
Kind of commun:
From:
JOllMW WIAiilG
(13a) fLOSgAimJAxiG HR, 55
UiiBilR 1^033
OBJiipriiL 2 - BAY3RU
GBRUA3Y
tJ6Se 20HS
LIST:
q/Qg/O
Station & Record No.:
A-** 4	29 ^ 06
To:
20 2113
LORD AM OR
II LOliDOI 0I2Y
31I0LMD
LIST:
Language:
Prev. Cens. by:
POLISH
Disposal of Orig.
Communication:
I0IE

Unit:
0
Table:
Examiner:	D. A. C:
112915
,0021
Reviewer:	Exam. Date:
Prev. Relev. Records:
ion
108361	20 Sep 4-6
Typ. Date:
24 Sep 46 (a!
ALLOCATION:
A. LOCAL
I0IE
B. US ZONE
JA
G-2/CIB
C. OMGUS
PJ&IJP
D. ALLIED
BT?TT
E. WASHINGTON
F. SPECIAL
B5f CM BSAKGtl
A(PSt)
RDP0R2 01 3RI2IGH OIPIGAR;, POSSIBLY LIU3D3R3D
BY GS
Lire Praas Bttsen LATHISf a British
0fficerr v&o organized the movement of
liberation, in Prance,, wes put into prison
in Paris, He then was transferred to the
concentration camp in Floaaen'auerg^ whore
he was kept in solitary confinenont., ^ o
2h© only conGction with the world was
the British consul In Lladridy '3io sent
him Red Gross parcels, ”
Enclosure; "Shortly 'before we were
liberated by tlie ihaericaas#
(23 Apr 45) :iro L-THTS was
token away with other prominent
prisoners, She majority was
murdered by the 33 and her®
oroaatod, Whether Hr, LATJLfS
shared thie cruel fate*. I am
unable to say,”
Original taxt Quoted verbatim®
Page 1 of 1 page.
TS
MI-l (AB)
NOTICE: Distribution of the foregoing information obtained from private communications will be confined to
those officials — military and/or civilian — who are specifically authorized to receive such information. No
quotation or reference to this submission may be made without reference to Civil Censorship Division (CCD) and
to the above "station and record number".
RESTRICTED
AGL (») 7-46-1000 M-5W0-18﻿\
N
v..
Subject
■ P^ocK .
..... v/ ..... . •£».'. .
^QB/ZIl6/5kA/Ai?s^.
2. If you are interested in this y,or son will you retain the
file until jrou have taken whatovc • .ctibn you think necessary.
3. If on the other hand you are in- a position to clear this
subject wiH you please return the file to this Branch together with
a clearance attached to it.

yb-	iMHKm '9(k
0 D V
Ext 21+07
Headquarters
British hrmy of the Rhine
LAOR.

REGISTERED/UHREG-jiiESED
m
Colond
ETtlH)
a|ps)
\
!
1.
✓﻿kbstri gted
A(PS.4 )
■AR/\1522£
SUB JE GT : - POCK, Henry.
Ref your BAOR/3796/64/1/a(P3.4.) dated 25 Nov 46.
We nave no trace of above named in this office
consequently can have no objection to his release.
Bile returned herewith.
and
• :t 2771
'AG Branch (WGS)
P!4 BA OR.
Enclosure

, C'ri yx 'j-
f^rroup oaptain,
n . /	„ Legal Staff,
0 i/c War Grimes Section.
(Captain. K.M. Young).

/RID﻿BA0iV1522a/lVll/JA0 .
f
•fiBSTEICTED,
I HP
3 :j®o 46#
Ofilcor i/c Military Depart'ien.t,
Ofiloe of the Judge Advocate General,
4 spring Gardens,
Cocsspur Street,
LONDON S.W.l.
o.c.
S.A.S., W.C.I.T#,
C/o A (Pi .4) HQ. i corps District,
3#&#0# *
n . :n .(?G#4) for
Lt# Col. non A.G., Ca yhell,
AAG Liaison (British)
c/o U*S* ar iri.Ci Branch,
APO 17o, bV. Ar y.
X.
which reads#
«
Subject* PosMble.
A postal intercept has been received in 'this o fiee
a British
;ir# Frans ugen Lli-VEIIS, _	---- ^
officer, who 'orpCHt®warthe movement of
liberation in Ihranc®, was put into prison
in Paris. He than was transferred to the
concentration caap in Floss enburg, /here
he was leapt in solitary confine ent........
Hie only connection with the world was
the British consul in Madrid, who sent
him Red Cross parcels."
Enclosures "Shortly before fce were
liberated by the Americans,
(23 Apr 4?) :tr.	was
taiven away with ithcr proainent
prisoners. The majority was
urdered by the BL cad here
cre.uated#	Jliethcr .tr# 18VENB
chared this cruel fate, % am >s1A)
unable to cay#"	/V
Have you any reference to this ■ratter please ?
.Group. Captain,
Legal Staff,
Officer i/c ar Crimes faction#
xt. 2628 -	(Gapt. H. Cleswr.)
j.A.G's Branch (Vi.c.r, .)
HQ# British Army of the Rhine,
Regis tered/Unregis tered/A 'O/G C6
*	.	\U
.﻿Subject: Extradition of Alleged War Criminals
RESTRICTED
.	____HEILEIG Albert__________
HQ Intelligence Div.
70 HQ Control Commission for Germany (BE)
Herford.	. V ;
JAG (WCS) ______
BAOR/ 3796 / 62	/A(PS4)
1* Attached is application for the extradition of the above named
°---------5.8. Zone__________to stand trial as an alleged War Criminal.
^7.	Y111 you please state on the pro-forna below whether you have any
objection to the proposed transfer being effected.
Ext: 2407
Headquarters,
British Army of the Rhine
BAOR
/JP
registered/hnregistehed
Subject:	Extradition of Alleges,-war
Criminals
Chief of Staff
n /} v?
cd- qL C
A(PS4)
HQ BAOR
Reference your BAOR/
x	There is no objection to the eafrad
to stand trial as an alleged War Criminal. *	™
x	Authority can NOT be granted for the
above named for the following reasons;-
above named

x Please delete whichever is inapplicable.﻿rnn/m
DEPUTY THEATER JUDGE ADVOCATE'S OFFICE
WAR CRIMES GROUP
UNITED STATES FORCES, EUROPEAN THEATER
APO 633
WCB Case No.
S£fMS&

1946
SUBJECT: Application for the Extradition of Alleged
War Criminal
TO	: A (PS.4), Headquarters, British Army of the
Rhine■
It is requested that the following named
individual be located for delivery to United States
custody as a war criminal:
LAST NAME: ME1.LIN&
CHRISTIAN NAIVE: Albert
PW op INTERNEE NO:
NATIONALITY:
DATE OF BIRTH:
UNIT:	Hnhnown
Unknown
UBlmoTO
RANK or OCCUPATION:
DATE & PLACE OF DETENTION:	M	aS Hot^urg
loapltal, BriU* 4«»#,
DATE & PLACE OF ARREST:
UNWCC or CROWCASS LIST NO:
7-©-g-io-n
PARTICULARS OF ALLEGED V/AR CRIME:
atrooitlee.______________________
ConoantR tion
WITNESSES TO ALLEGED CRIME:.

0. E. STRAIGHT
Colonel JAGD
Deputy	vo c at e
110
Telephone: WIESBADEN 7251, Ext _____
2608-46﻿A (PS.4)
HQ BAOR.

BAOR/15228/11/11/JAG
10 Dec 46
Subject: HEILTOG. Albert.
Reference your BA0R/3796/62/ACPS.4)
dated 5 Gee 46,
This office has no objection to the
extradition of the a/n to the American Zone,
Ext: 2628
JAG’s Branch (WCS),
HQ BAOR.________
-p
Group Captain,
Legal Staff,
0 i/c War Crimes Section.
(Capt. H. CLEAVER).
HC/NB﻿Office of :
/371S/21/58(1E)
CONFIDENTIAL
D. J « A» (t» f
H.Q. ,
B.A.O.R.
The Judge Advocate General,
6, Spring Gardens,
Cockspur Street,
LONDON, S.W. 1.
10 Decembe
War Crimes
Presumed death of Lieutenant—LNVENS
Reference your 3A0I^/lp228/l 1/11/JAG/dated 3 December 1946.
1. The only information avaiWyTeT in this office concerns a
Lieutenant Francis Eugene LEVENS (p/235918) Royal Artillery, who
was commissioned in the SeSTBL-'jrist and is believed to have
occupied Cell No. 5 at Flossenburg Concentration Camp.
2.	M.0.1. (S.P. ) state that it is
was killed on the 29th ilarch 1945.
3.	Nothing further is known about

"reasonably certain" that he
for Military Deputy,
J • A. G.﻿L, <3ration followed sson
entr ^ad me : HTo tell his
torture and fate - that all
flinching, and I was to add
Sir, I have done my duty
in case you wish to hear my
after. Here is the message with which he
superior officers in the cluh of their
were determined to die bravely and without
a message of affection for their families.
and hold myself at your entire disposition
story.
May I express my gratitude ,Sir, for the speed with which you and
your Allies brought us help.
Mile.DEVIE, Genevieve 29219
from ZIVODAU camp (FLOSSEUBURG)﻿SAS/ 11/42/12
SAS War Crimes
Investigation Team
c/b APS 4
1.Corps Hq. B A 0 R
To
JAG-'s Branch
War Crimes Section
Eg, B A 0 R
December 1946
Sub.ject:- Possible War Crimea

With reference to your BAOR/1522	AG
1.	No SAS personnel were held at Flossenburg .
2.	The only information which might refer ‘to this case
is a statement made by Mile. Genevieve Devie of
1.Impasse de la Lune Strassburg which was sent to
me by AG^ (VW) .
A copy of this statement is enclosed .
Ma j or
0/C SAS W.C.I.T
Z Enclosure^﻿COPY
B.M, 402/8 AG 3 V/W.
■subject: FLOSSENBURG CONCENTRATION CAMP.
T°: Diatrlteutlon.
1.	Herewith a letter received among answers to a broadcast and
newspaper appeal made in Strassbourg in September 1945, to help
the SAS War Grimes Investigation Team in their work.
2.	If it is possible to identify the officer in question, you are
asked please to notify this office.
(Signed) Galitzin
Capt.
D. A. A . G.
Distribution:
J.A,G.(with origina1 letter)
Gas. P.W.
M.O.I. (SP)
HQ SAS Troops
Air.2
25th October 45﻿COPY
Strassbourg, 18 Sept.45
Mile,Oenevi&ve DEVIS
c/o Mma.Muench. Impasse de la Lune 1. Stragsbour^,
To Caut, Oalltalne.
For^iva roe,Sir., for the delay In sending you this information. But not
baaing an Alsatian, I did. not know where and to whom to send it. I must
apologise too for having forgotten the greater part of it, as after the
events below I became seriously ill with typhus.
I was a political deportee and during the last stages of the war I w&s
interned in the camp of Zivodau which depended on the camp for men at
Flossenburg in Czechoslovakia. I was found guilty of complicity in the
blowing up of a goods wagon loaded with bombs enganeered by several of my
camr, mates, and was condemned to solitary confinement. For the carriing otii
of this sentence I was sent to the frightful prison in.the camp of Flossen
burg -this happened in Oct.44, but there was an air raid on the camp and
the prison by ®- miracle wss not hit although there were several very wide
cracks in the walls which were quickly repaired. As I was the only woman
in the prison, the warders who had received definite orders to maltreat me
were for not apparent reason ''quite good" to me.
As a result I was able to keep the bed clothes on my bed which enabled
me to hide a fairly large crack hidden under my bed,and my neighbours bed
was stretched along the length of the wall on the other side, thus hiding
it completely. I could,therefore, communicate with my neighbour, an Bng-
11sg Officer, who spoke fluent French,-he was avaiting a sentence of deaeh
to be carried out and gave me hia name and his adress.Alas, I can not lon-
ger remember more than his christan name: PHILIPP, and his name which I
can't remember or garaotee to be exact: ARI(?)ETT (or (?)ARLETT),Hls
adress: artlaan( ?) ,,rational Club of London. Commander of a group of p&rs.^
chutists' working in the Clermont-Ferrand area. He had bean denounced and
arrested, as wall as the 10 or 15 of his group when he was hording a train
at a station whose name I forgot. I don’t remember how they got to the
camp.
mh-9 reason for which they were awaiting a slow death was as follows:-
These 11 or 14 men were shut up, one to a cell,all in a row- The execu-
tioners started with Ii° l(rny neighbour’a, the leader) , with N°14 as the
last to be dealt with.They started by torturing 1°1,leading to a slow
death at the end of 5 weeks.Than they killed this partyr,they announced
it to ell his comrades as well as the fact that they were starting on the
second,and so on. All knew themselves to be condemned. Everyman counted
the days-all suffered from hunger and thirst and cold,and from lack of
news of the outside world. But not one raised s murmur or lost his smile.
However,from the news that did reach the camp, and from the obvious lock
of .Icy on the wonder/ faces and the diminishing ferocity of their treat-
ment, it was easy to guess that events of great consequences were occuring
at that time. I did,in fact, manage to tell ray neighbour of the possibili-
ty of the Allies reaching the camo in the near future and stir up some
hope,little enough alas for life at. that time.Thanks to a code known only
to themselves, they could by irregular taps of their knuckles on the Walls
communicate this news from one to the other. I don’t know if these men,
whose courage was so emaemplary and who in spite of all crual sufferings
hid their feelings from their executioners,who are still alive,Their
death was almost certainly hurried on.
I don’t know if this information concerns the group of parachutists
whom you mention in the newspaper of the 13 Sept.But I would like to
expre.ss the hope that such information ps I have been able to give you,
little enough alas,will enable you to identify them. This officer begged
me to pass on the message to all my fellow women exiles hoping that if
one came out alive she would pass it on. But,alas,I was struck down with
■typhus and then dysentry in that very cell,and was carted off to the camp
infirmary where I was unable to communicate with any of my friends.﻿mOFORWi "H"
NT
Annexura YIII
Subjeot: &0LTZ£A31>folr( L |	R(C^VU C. 4o^tcca<A'
T.o: JAG (WCB)
Ha. BAOR

1.
2.

Enolosad herewith are papers relating to the a/n who fa held in
No. 6 divilian Internment Ganp,
Details of subject’s arrest are as follows:-
Arrested by:
At: ((UHLKftHP
S^Fs?-
on:	TA/I^S-
••	, b-cU fbnuut, ,
Reason for arrest
3» These papers are forwarded to you in order that you may consider
whether proceedings should be taken against the internea as a war criminal.
4. Subject is of no 01 interest/ Gubicni-is-of-GI -iatenast^for^iha
following reasons:-
5* If you do not wish to retain these papers, they should bo returned
to 0.0. R.&I.S, No. 6 0.1.0, Nouongaiano BAOR.
6. Please aok receipt of those papers to Int. Bureau.

o.o.	^
No. 6 Civilian Internment Camp
Review and Interrogation Staff
.46
if njfi
'***%*•';■'1


﻿﻿mOFORUk "H"

X
fAi
Subject
AmexureVIII.
: fiRElTCNSraW (Wj*Jr
loi JAG (WCS)
HQ, BAOR

1.	Enclosed herewith are papers relating to the a/n who is hold in
No, 6 Qivilian Internment Gamp*
2,	Details of subject's arrest are as follows:-
Arrostod by:	e£2.*
At: N£o&TA1>T*	On: \l\lj*S
Reason for arrest: foMtr- Mk I1! i	’	■it’'
f IC2 <*c«uot r&***«b**f <*1vh
3» These papers are forwarded to you in order that you may consider vf
whether proceedings should be taken against the internea as a war criminal.
4* Subject is of no 01 interest/ Sukj-eo-t i-s of 01 in-tQ-rest for the
following reasons: -	-
r 'h.:; ":i
If you do not wish to retain these papers, they should bo returned
to 0.0. R.&I.S. No. 6 O.I.C. Nouengammo BAOR.
6.
Please ack receipt of those papers to Int. Bureau.

0.0.
No. 6 Oivilfen'internment Canp
Review and Interrogation Staff
.46﻿﻿HtOFORMA. "H"


Subject
NT

Annexure VIII
;	hJidvdm,
To: JAG (WOS)
B3, BAOR
$■£/.
1.
2.
Enclosed herewith are papers relating to the o/n who is hold in
No. 6 Oivilian Internment Gamp.
Details of subject's arrest are as follows!"
Arrested by: ^3 J)(V. dxt- fe&Ju,
At:	kcaozivviac^ev* On: elS/*?/** '
Reason for arrest
: \L7.^UuCudL- n* t
3» These papers are forwarded to you in order that you may consider
whether proceedings should be taken against the internee as a war criminal.
4. Subject is of no 01 interest/ Street—M--©f-0I~tsi4>arest- for the—
following reasons:-
5. If you do not wish to retain these papers, they should bo returned
to 0.0. R.&I.S. No. 6 0.1.0, Nouonganmo BAOR.
6. Please aok receipt of those papers to Int. Bureau.
//Vy/
0.0.
No. 6 Civilian Internment Camp
Review and Interrogation Staff
,46
f''.
f ■
\﻿﻿
i
HIOFORMA. "H"
Annexure VIII
; T^TE^SENJ I AlcfoK,
Subject
T.o: JAG- (WOS)
HQ, BAOR

1.	Enclosed herewith are papers relating to the o/n who is held in
No. 6 Civilian Internment Gamp,
2.	Details of subject's arrest are as follows:-
Arrested by:	T>.C.O-
At: fLCNSfiyee- •	On:
Reason for arrest:	KZ	.
These papers are forwarded to you in order that you may consider
whether proceedings should be taken against the intornca as a war criminal.
4* Subject is of no 01 interest/ SaakjQct-is__pf 01 interest for the
following reasons:-
5» If you do not wish to retain these papers# they should bo returned
to 0.0. R.&I.S. No. 6 Q.I.C. Nouengammo BAOR.
6. Please ack receipt of those papers to Int. Bureau.
A
No. 6 Civilian Internment Canp
Review and Interrogation Staff﻿C
O.C. 3
ReviGiff and Intelligence Staff5
No, Civilian Internment Campj
B. A «ffi • R.
SUBJECT;
,	> Z Ji. a ■jGj.iil', . >i
Reffirence your proforma 'H* dated
This office has no record of the a/n, no proceedings-
against him are contemplated.	^
1 i r- t /X‘ncd a-., rr .at .
Ext; 2628
JAG's Branch (War Crimes Section)5
HQ EAOR.	„________________
\ic
%
Group Captain,
Legal Staff,
0 i/c War Crimes Section,
j 1.
i
Copy to; Central Registry, )
Int. Bureau,	)
GSI, HQ BAOR.	)
X.V . . A-VA
papers regarding a/n
are returned herewith,-
XXXX . X.aX XXX* XXX ..﻿JEKF V DAAG NR 04 WD
FROM LT COL C R W BOYD MAUNSEL*., wo
.	7708 WAR CRIMES GROUP APO 178 US ARMY AUGSBURG
WAR CRIMES GROUP HQ BAOR
(EXFOR)
GRNC
A<L)/318. FOR LEGAL SECTION . YOUR LETTER BA0R/15228/U/U/JAG DATED
3 DECEMBER . U S AUTHORITIES CAN FIND NO TRACE OF THIS -INCIDENT ,
i﻿
Annexure VIII
RESTRICTED
"ROFORMA ‘H’
Sul .. DREES, Eduard (9868)
To: JAG (WCS)
HQ BAOR
WAR CRIMES GROUP
1. Enclosed herewith are papers relating to the a/n who is held in No. 7 Civilian Internment
Camp.
Details of subject's arrest are as follows
13 APR 1947
REF:— . ljl'7
TH WEST EUROPE).
hours
Arrested by: 2 Cdn. FSS
At:	Clopperiburg	On:	^ August 19*+^*
Reason for arrest:	Obersturnrfhiehrer Waffen-SS
3.	These papers are forwarded to you in order that you may consider whether proceedings
should be taken against the internee as a war criminal.
4.	Subject is of no Cl interest / Subject is of Cl interest for the following reasons:—
5.	If you do not wish to retain these papers, they should be returned to Central Registry, Int﻿'••rAR CRIMES GROUP (NORTH IfEST EUROPE)
*:	: "rUu •’ atr-HQ. vBAOR.' •	-'L. .
2628
Rsf : BAOR/
0/0 No Civilian Internme'^t Camp,
«	B.A.O.R.
ES1LHBK®,
SUBJECT:
mm
Reference ycur pro -""f'oi
/	&\A|>r 47*
This office has no Record of tho above nSffcd • no
proceedings are contemplat'd against him.
Legal Section
19
~lSTpf-----T 4?.
^C-roup Captain,
Group
Copy to : X,nt Div	)	(Capt* A.^BV.; CO-'SON).
/HQ CCG (BE) ) Papers regarding a/n arc •
HERFORD, BAOR ) returned here with / acknowledged
EEC-ISTERED/UNREG ISTERED
sds/apo﻿H.Q. 3.A.0.H
WOVl5 228/11/11/Legal.
Legal
2997
19 Apr 47.
?oj- British ar Crimes Liaison Officer,
<^0 TJC 'Aar Crimes Branch,
APO 1?8, US Aim.
Subjects TLO-SSTOUIG.
1« I herewith enclose Cl Questionnaire referring to MBK3, Bernhard
Vilhelm Sdunrd, who was a guard at PLCSBESBUX and leeched the rank of
ObersturEii uhr«r in the S3,
2. Will you pleaae contact the American authorities dealing with bhe
FLOSSSUBUISl case in order to ascertain whether they want LHESSE as it is
proposed to release him if they do not.
Group Captain,
0 i/c .far Crimea Croup (ME}.
(Major o.M. ATAAAHl)
fiEGISTEHSH/URRiSGISTEHED
AvC/sm﻿BRITISH LIAISON DETACHMENT
DEPUTY THEATER JUDGE ADVOCATE’S OFFICE
WAR CRIMES GROUP
APO 178 UNITED STATES ARMY
imx
LegaJ. Section,
War Grimes Group (NWE)
HQ BAOR
Tel: AUGSBURG Mil 7681 -7686
Exts 119 & 173
In reply please quote this Ref:
BA0R/30/4/66/A (L )
Date:	1 May 1947
FLOSSENBURG
SUBJECT:_______________________________
This office has been in touch with the American
authorities regarding the subject in the attached Arrest
Report.
American War Crimes have no interest in the above
mentioned man.﻿‘ ■
Legal Section,
War Grimes Group (NWl)
HQ MOR	MQR/30/V66/A(L)
1 Hay 1947
HjOSSMBUHG
\
This office has been in touch with the American
authorities regarding the subject in the attached Arrest
' ^I Report*
American War Crimes hare no interest in the above
mentioned man.
Captain J.X. Ratcliffe DSO <M
00 British Liaison Detachment﻿Copy
ARREST REPORT.
|NAME.......	... ................FIRST NAME(s),
ALIAS..............nil ...............................................
NATIONALITY CLAIMED ............isrman......................................
ADDRESS OF LAST RESIDENCE.........lGi> , . 31/ |£	4/vll44Ml-iMyrg-'

occupation.......Faraer ... ana., riding...instructor,................
identity documents	^ert Ificat® oi oiscnarfe issusci UT
.........................Fy'.form.....................................
DETAILS OF ARREST: (a) PLACE ; ....
■(b) date 6rt»i;u8t 1	(c) TIME	urs,
UNIT MAKING ARREST	2	.	■'
REASON FOR ARREST
x.bersturafUhrer . at fen .
(further details to be written on back if necessary)
WITNESSES: NAMES AND ADDRESSES .................................................
STATEMENT AFTER ARREST........
(attach on separate sheet if necessary)
sea reversc siae
PROPERTY: (Property taken from prisoner to be listed on back, together with description and where-
abouts of any other property relevant to the case.)
MILITARY OR CIVIL AUTHORITY TAKING CUSTODY OF THE PRISONER
.................li.Q .2. wdtn. .F.,S..S.,................................................
Signature of person authorising arrest..........................Rank......Q...f. *........
Date fc AttC-USt 1945...............
SHAEF AGO Form No. 7﻿:■ rot J j'iven voiuatari-ly
3 ;.,**• s of cigmcettG-p&i-mt
5 Box. ita onevring toDacco
t puree cant. 21 mark and aBalJLohan^*
POW f orm
US Arm^ discharge paper
Diacic-ieatner waixet cpnt.
^pictures
3u7 Aiixks	^
1 wriet-vsatoh
I certify that the shove listed articles and mone^ is all I had in aaj
possession wnen 1 caae to uo 2 Qdn. F3S
leh best a tig© niermit, dass die ooenan&efiinrten , jrtixel una ueld, ailes
1st was ion in meineui Jesitz hatte, als ion nach ho 2 udn. f. kam.
tatesent
8aaet
iiomi 29/1/1901 lodbergen
Pat,* ^ era an
wco.s Parmer
last res,s iodbergen near Lbningen
Married: .yes, wife lives Jin ingen
1/5/1933 held no rank.
HsV appr. 1935 no rank
oaf since ly3d no rank
affen Ji 1933. ^as a member of a aeiter-verein and became riding-
instructor. All members had to Jisi the 03 and the
hame became . > - .eitcrsturm. a/m became the rank oj^
Intersoharftihrer. In 1339 he joined the * affen EVf
5 eg. in uranienourr, and became riding-instructor,
with the rank of oberscharfu^irer. ^d after 3 weeks
he was made i.auptscharftihrer. as discharged in Lecmber
1939 because he fell fro® a horse and wasseriouely
wounded, ns called up again in 194w ana went to
{•lessenburg, where he became riding-instructor for
the :;u officers in the flossenburg-concentrationeamp,
in 1943 he became InteraturmfUhrer and in 1944 he
became wbersturmfdhrer.
He looked after the food-suunlv in the casQ. .1﻿358905
1
Copy
P/9868
21 A.Gp. Form 97
Cl QUESTIONNAIRE
Westertimke
Internment Camp No..
Place
Date
2. 11. 45
(1)	Surname, All "Alias”, indicate if Black List .....................................
(2)	Christian Names...Bernhard. Wilhelm. Eduard.......................................
(3)	Rank or Appointment ..............................................................
(4)	Nationality at Birth ............................... ..............~..............
(5)	Present Nationality .......German ................................................
(6)	Date and Place of Birth..29. 1* ^Ol, Lodbergen, Post Loeningen (Old,).
(7)	Father’s name, age, occupation, address, nationality at birth ....................
Heinrich, Lpdbergen, German...................................................
(8) Mother’s name, maiden name, age, occupation, address, nationality at birth
Karoline nee Bischof, German..................................
(9) Wife’s name, maiden name, age, occupation, address, nationality at birth
.....Dora .nee..Afcein,.. 36..yeiws,. .housewife...........................
(10) Children’s name(s), age, occupation, address of children over 16
Karl Heinz 6 y.
Dieter
5 y.
(11)
Present home address.Lodbergen. hei.Ito.eningen (Old.)
(12) Business address(es) H.i.lfsherat.er..(.Rei.chsmae.hr.stand) Eduard.Krees, ^Lodbergen
v '	hex Loemngen (Old. )
(13) Travel abroad: List of all journeys outside Germany in the last 10 years:-
Countries visited	Date	Purpose of Journey
...Netherlands..............1938. (.14 days).........Hochzeitsreise
Verwandtehbesuch
(b) since 1939

(14)	Languages spoken (state degree of fluency)”*?..
(15)	Religion ..Kath,.
(16)	Occupation.—giving name(s) of employer(s), with dates:—
(a) 1933-1939 ..Hilfsberater........................
1933-1.9,38 Landwirt bei Bauer H. Drees, Lpdbergen.
. sines.. .1938. ifilf sberater. .Landesbauernachaf t. .lesernE,.,.. and. .Reit.-r. .u... Pahrlehrer﻿2
(17)	Schooling (with dates), if under 18 ............................
Volksschule 1907-13
Buergerschvile 1913 - 14
Landw. ^achschtile 1923 - 25
(18)	Particulars of Military Service
(a) Before the war
Number	Unit	Date of Enlistment	Rank	Brief particulars of service with locations and dates
	(Note: Show changes of unit with dates)		(Note:Show promotions with dates)	(Note: Space parti- culars to come level with relevant details in Unit and Rank columns)
				
				
				
				
				
					
	. '			
				
					
				
				
	*			
				
				
				
. (b) During the war﻿J
3
19)
(a) If a member of the NSDAP, state number, date, and place of joining.........
.3,900.550 (?) Eintr. 1. 5. 1933 Ortsgr. Loeningen (Old.)
..........Pg,................. ..........................................
(f>) If any official position in NSDAP, state rank, appointment and area of responsibility (e.g.
Ortsgru ppenleiter, MUNSTER)...........................................................................
(c)	If a member of one or more of the following, state date of joining and leaving;, also last
rank held and unit:
II.J. (or Bd.M)................................................................
R.	A.D.........................................■...............................
S.	S. (a) Allgemeine..&llg....SS..Since..May..1933.............................
(mcl. S.D.) ss-Reiterstr. 2/R 9 = SS-Untersturmfuehrer
(b) WaffenWr-SS.. since Autumn. .1939,.. 5«..SS-Tot,K, Reg. Oranienbtirg, SS-Oberst. F.
S.A..................•.........................................................
N.S.K.K........................................................................
N.S.F.K........................................................................
(d)	Particulars of association with any other Nazi organisation (i.e. Angeschlossener Verband
or Betreute organisation, or any professional trade Bund), together with relevant dates
and position held ............................................................
DAF since 1938...............................................................
(20)	If a member of the police, state the following:
(a) Branch of service..............................................................................
(&) Years of service...............................................................................
(c)	Last rank and salary..........................................................................
(d)	Unit or station where you last served.......................................................
(e)	Particulars of service abroad.................................................................
(/) Date of promotion.............................................................................
(21)	State any connection with the Abwehr, Sicherheitsdienst or Gestapo. Details of special train-
ing, technical or otherwise, received in espionage, sabotage, propaganda, etc..........................
(22) If ever in a prison or concentration camp?
If so, state when, where, why, and for how long﻿4

(23) Any other particulars.
Interrogators’ estimate of interest of case and recommendations.﻿﻿.&OFORMA ‘H’
Su1 t:
IKIKZj...Christian... (9.5.Q/l3QQ4.)^
To: JAG (WCS)
HQ BAOR
tj.j
Annexure VIII
RESTRICTED
1.	Enclosed herewith are papers relating to the a/n who is held in No. 7 Civilian Internment
Camp.
2.	Details of subject’s arrest are as follows:—
Arrested by: Commando Int. Team, G.S.I.('b) I st Corps
At:	Wickrathberg	On:	25. 7* 45
Reason for arrest:	Scharfuehrer des SS-Totenlcopf-Sturnibannes Plossehbuerg
W i v
3.	These papers are forwarded to you in order that you may consider whether proceedings
should be taken against the internee as a war criminal.
4.	Subject is of no Cl interest / Subject is of Cl interest for the following reasons:—■
5.	If you do not wish to retain these papers, they should be returnee
Bureau, GSI, HQ BAOR.
6.	Please ack receipt of these papers to Int Bureau.
Central Registry, Int
13 June Kgd/Th.
1947
PS'S (HQ) 4913G/3M/2-47﻿\
/ WAR CRIMES GROUP (NORTH VUEST EUROPE)
at H.Q. R.A.O.R# ,
2771	Legal Section*
Ref: Waj/15228/ll/ll/Legal.	24 Jun 17*
To
OG No __J_ R & I Staff
c/o No _2__ Civilian Internment Camp,
HQ 400 COG (BE),	B.A-O.R.
is ^
SUBJE CT: HEINZ, Christian.
Ref your pro--forma 'H' dated 13 Jun 47*
Vtfe have no trace of a/n.
No proceedings are contemplated against him
WAR
cr,MES OROUf
25
REF:
(NORTH
Copy to
(./.QQ
(for) Group Captain,
0 i/c War Crimes Group (NWE)
Int Oiv	(LI1* Ool. G-.I.D. DRh.EER),
HQ 70 GCG (BE) - paper enclosed v^ith a/q p~f
HEREORD, BAOR returned herewith/a-ek-no-wl-ed-ge^-.
y/EST EU^'E)-﻿US WAR CRIMES LIAISON DECACHpNT (b)
HEADQUARTERS BRITISH ARMJ OF EHE RHINE
9 Sept 47
y	,	‘	■’i
SUBJECT L Perpetrator^ and Witnesses in Custody in the British
Zone Wanted by US for War Crimes.
TO
00 Legal Section, War Crimes Group NWE HQ BAOR
&
Executive (T & E ) Section, War crimes Group NWE, HQ BAOR'
Listed below are .all the perpetrators'and friendly witnesses in
c'qrefinement who arc wonted by US-for war crimes and who are believed
to be in the British Zone,
Albert HE3XIN& 000-50-i»i

7
2, The concentration camp cases arc listed above as follows.
000-50-2 Dachau
> OOO-5O-3 Auschwitz
000-5©-5 Mauthausen
OOO-5O-5 Buchenwald
000-50-37 Nordhausen
000-50-2i-6 Floss- riburg
000-50-136 Muhldorf
o.	(
3.	Cases .numbers dehinning "with 11 indicate a mass crime o
than^thosc in connection/with conoontration camps.'
4.	ase numbers begin..ing with 12 indicate an isolated atrocity case
^eberally .shooting of an allied airman)
5.	It is emphasised that the above Isit does not ireclSde witnesses
who are held, in British custody as well as perpetrators either
•held or not, and that the list does not r peat not, contain the
names of wetnesses not in custody.
FOR THE COMMANDING OFFICER :
Rhine Army 2082
CHARLES L WHITE
1st Lt. ,Inf,
EXECUTIVE
x-﻿6-S
*i* c -• » - #	*
Logal
23 :^p 4?
Xo j 2* » v Crl^oo ■ iisi Lsoa :-'v>taCia3e:it
H# .« ii« .
XODJ C5j
uoferonco yo«r iottor detod 9 Sap 47,	V_. ^
*uis . octle" h<>3 no iafcaroation of tilia os’esont loen.t.for.
of tho a/n#
ills cletoation wno ootifiod by this '.action in Jul 46
by --(• 4) of tills I:., (im •-« tv.., ooction of this Gfwip) vt»
woro advised b m tf t-t, ixi view of his connection with
if.- ...21,ui.;C CaiT'?j n-'- '.'.o filrsOst certainly wanteCi by you.

(for) frou;. Cnytain,
. i/c US’ friaos creep ..(f >4
: 0 i Uli#	C *
H.C •
f liv* ^ —1 - : •﻿H.Q., 3.A.O.R. 1
m
,/CG/l 5^23/11/11/Legal.
2446*
Legal.
4 "’oteuary 1948.
To s* ilerrn Dr. Iluchthausen,
Ueohtsansalt,
iiinbook,
Ilollerser Jtr. 3.
Subject:• Flosaeriburg. K,.^,
Reference your letter of 29 Jan 42.
1.	The American Authorities were responsible for dealing with^
the above named ooncentration Caaip Oaoe and the investigations were carried
out by theas this Group had nothing to do with the matter beyond passing
on information to the American Jar Crimes authorities.
2.	it is understood, however, that the Co.^Tandant and 51 xosmbers
of the Jtaff of this jsaap were tried at Daoiiau in Ju.-e 1947.
3.	should you require further information you might eaminurdcate
with the Legal Director,	' _
0 H G U 3,
I3erlin.
IK
(for) Group Captain,
Officer i/° :ar Crimea Group (NJE).
(Major. H. Cleaver).
nc/sm﻿Dr ,kir. H. Hudithausen

jHjnkortr den 29»4-»
29*i.l948
Rechtsanwalt
EINBECK
zugelassei	im Landgeridit Gottingen
Fernruf: Einbeck Nr. 265
■ Hu	tr. 3 <M6n<hehof)
War Crime investigation Cro.up,
Uox,tIi-ur& st-Europ e	, .
Bad _0_e_y_n_-iiwa-u_s_e_n_
Bankverbindung:
Genossensdiaftsbank e. G. m. b. H., Einbeck
In einar Sprucliyerichtasacke bin ioh d&rauf hlngewiesen worden,
dass uber die Vernalmisse in dem friiheren i-onzentratzionslager
Blosssnburg gegen La.gerfu.hrer und dort komm«naiertd Wacbmann-
sohai'ten ein Verfabren durongefuiirt sein. soil.
icii v/are a^nicour, yvenn mix von dortaus ®in Hinweis gegeben wer-
dan- konnte, wann und' wo ein soldier Irozass stattgefunden tat.
\
Rechtsanwalt,
Dreske & Kruger CPH11 Hannove* 3359/10-0 10' 47 Kl. A