[SECRET CONFIDENTIAL LIBRARY    WAR CABINET    CHIEFS OF STAFF COMMITTEE    MINUTES OF MEETINGS    C.O.S. 43 5U7-90T MEETING  VOL. II, TQ UPPTUNPERi QM Y    H Is rsciUiisstad thfct special osrt    217     n u th ewwwy thlP     THIS DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY OF HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY'S GOVERNMENT.     g C  R ElT    g S. 45 75th Meeting.    WAR CABINET.    7    CHIEFS OF STAFF COMMITTEE.    MINUTES of Meeting held on WEDNESDAY  24TH MARCH. 1Q4 . at 5.dO o.m.    P EE  S EN T.    Vice-Admiral Sir Henry R. Moore  Vice-Chief of Naval Staff. in the Chair    Air Marshal Sir Douglas Evill Brigadier F.C. Curtis  Vice-Chief of the Air Staff. representing the Vice-Chief  of the Imperial General Staff.    THE FOLLOWING WERE .-ASO PRESENT.    Air Vice-Marshal C.E.H. Medhurst Grou-Capt ..in C. McK. Grierson.  Air Ministry. For items 1-3 For item l    SECRETARIAT.    Brigadier L.C. Hollis.  Wing Commander J.N. Jefferson.  Lt.-Colonel J.E.B. Barton.    1. O.S.S. OPERATIONS IN NORWAY.   C.0.S. 45 145 0     Previous reference C.0.5. 45 4Sth Meeting 0 .  Minute 2    THE COMMITTEE had before them a Note by the  Secretary covering alternative draft replies to the  American proposal concerning O.S.S. operations in Norway.    THE COMMITTEE     a  Approved the reply at Annex I to the  above paper subject to the War  Office amendment to paragraph 2 b  with the substitution of the  words agreement with for the  approval of in the last line of the new  paragraph 2 b .   b  Invited S.O.E. to convey the reply  to O.S.S.  -1, 213    2 . r.OMTVITTMTCATIONS Il\l NORTH .AFRI- ik'   C.O.S.   45 .145 Jol  THE COMITTEE had before them a kemorandum by  the Wireless Telegraphy Board on Cornnrunications in  North Africa.    THE COMITTEE     a Concurred generally in the advice  given by the Wireless Telegraphy  Board.     b  Instructed the Secretary to  despatch the telegram at jmex  II as amended in discussion  and the telegram at Annex III  to General Eisenhower   c  Invited the Wireless Telegraphy  Board to report further on the  progress made in discussing  these cuestions with General  Eisenhower s reprosentative and  in procuring the personnel  and.apparatus required if the  cable schemes were to be put  into effect.   Sent as 2219 of 24/3  x Sent as 2220 of 24/3  3. NEW CEILING FOR A A. COMMAND   Previous Reference C.0.S. 4-5 GGthMeeting    THE COMMITTEE had before them     i  a Note by the Secretary   C.O.3. 43 87   ii  a Report by the Joint Intelligence  Sub-Committee on scale of attack  against the United Kingdom.   J.I.0 43 124 0 Final  Thera. as general agreement that the Joint  Intelligence Sub.-Casiniit s Report in no way affected  the previous provisional ieciaion that the ceiling  of A A. Command could nov/ be reduced to 180 000 men  and 77 000 A.T.S.    On the other hand the extent of the A.A.  commitment for the defence of airfields had not yet been  decided.    -2    aJXj eA uL., -r    L    BRIGyJ IEH CURTIS suggested that as the decision re  garding the ceiling depended in the main on the scale of  attach it would he very advantageous for administrative  reasons as between the War Office and the A.A. Command if  the proposed ceiling could he finally accepted -this ceiling  to include the holding and draft finding organisation.    SIR DOUGLAS EVTLL agreed that the question of ceiling  was not affected hy the Joint Intelligence Sub-Committee's  Report hut suggested that it would be inadvisable to submit  a formal recommendation to the prime Minister until the out  standing airfield defence commitments had been settled.    THE COMMITTEE     a  Took note ofihe Report by the Joint  Intelligence Sub-Committee and that  the scale of attack was virtually  unaltered   b  Reaffirmed their conclusion that the  proposed ceiling of A.A. Command  to include holding and draft  finding organisations was not  affected by the above Report.      c  Invited the A.O.C.-in-C Fighter Command  to hasten the report on the number of  airfields requiring A.A. defences.   d  Agreed to defer the submission of a final  recommendation to the Prime Minister  until the report referred to in c  above had been received.   C.O.S. 43 68th Meeting Conclusion q    4 INFORMATION FOR THE RUSSIANS     0.0.3. 45 90   THE COMMITTEE had before them a Note by the Secretary  covering a draft reply to telegram J.S.M. 826.    THE COMMITTEE -   Approved the reply as amended in  discussion and instructed the  Secretary to despatch it.     Sent  as C.O.S. W 543    Offices of the War Cabinet    S.W.I.  24th March 1943.  /    3, , THIS DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY OF HIS BRITAMNIC MAJESTY'S GOVERNIVIRMT   The circulation ol this paper has been strictly limited.  It is issued lor the personal useof. CL. .   TO BE KEPT UNDER LOCK AND KEY   It is requested that special care may be taken to  ensure the secrecy of this document  most secret. Copy No3.1.   0.0.84 45 45th Meeting O    WAR CABINET    CHIEPS OP STAFF COMMITTEE    Part of 0.0 .S. 45 65th Meeti ng Minute 5  held on Monday 15th March 1945 at 10 50 a n.    1. FRENCH RESISTANCE IN NATIONAL TERRITORY  C.0.S. 45 ISO 0    THE COMMITTEE had before them the translation of a  letter/ from General de Gaulle to the Prime Minister  which together with Major Morton s comments had  been referred by the Prime Minister for the comments of  the Chiefs of Staff    Reference was also made to a letter7 dated  14th March from UC.D.5' to Lieutenant-General Ismay  pointing out that not all the resisting groups to v/hich  General de Gaulle referred in his letter were of the  de Gaullist persuasion    GROUP CAPTAIN GRIERSON explained that S.O.E wer  in touch with various factions of resistance in Franc  some of which but not all supported General de Gaul  The policy which S.O.E had followed in the past had  been to damp down any overt resistance which in thef  opinion would be premature5 until we were in a position  to supply them with adequate quantities of arms and  equipment but secretly to encourage the organisation of  all factions prepared to resist the Germans. Any  concerted rising should be timed to coincide with our  invasion of French territory. There was some danger  that General de Gaulle might encourage resistance in  France to proportions beyond our present capacity for  supporting it and the subsequent disappointment might  adversely affect the clandestine operations on which we  counted for help at the time of invasion.    G.0.S. 45 120 0 Annex I.   C.O.3. 45 120 0 Annex II.     Annex  -1, 9 IT 4    He suggested that General de Gaulle should he informed  that the co-ordination of the measures for providing support  to the resisting groups was in the hands of S.O.E. and that  he should he invited to inform the groups with v/hom he was  in contact that they should not at present break out into    open resistance.    MAJOR GENERAL KENNEDY said that a policy of  indiscriminate support would encourage Frenchmen to take  to the hills in an attempt to escape German forced labour  and that the problem of supplying them would soon be quite  beyond our powers. He pointed out that the Joint  Intelligence Sub-Committee had been instructed to report  on the value of the intelligence on which General de Gaulle s  letter had been based and suggested that any report to the  Prime Minister should be deferred until the Joint  Intelligence Sub-Committee 9 report had been received    GROUP CAPTAIN GRIERSON said that in the meanwhile    S.O.E. would require guidance on the extent to which the  present conflagration should be supported. He gave the  Committee an estimate of the air effort required to  maintain guerillas in France  THE COMMITTEE     a  Agreed that at this stage S.O.E. should  not embark on a large scale supply of  food arms and equipment to bodies of  local resistance in France   b  Agreed to defer a reply to the Prime  Minister until after consideration  of the report by the Joint Intelligence  Sub-Commi11ee.  -2, 3 E H  tl ei    0. S. S OPERATIONS IN NORWAY. 2.  C.0.S 43 117 0 .    THE COMMITTEE had before then a note by S.O.E.  putting forward a proposal for a psychological warfare  undertaking in Norway by O.S.3. based on Iceland c    GROUP CAPTAIN GRIERSON explained to the Committee  what was involved in the 0 S.S. proposal. The Americans  were anxious to branch out in Norway largely because  there was a Norwegian colony in the United States from  which suitable material could be drawn their operations  in other parts of the world had been handicapped by lack  of suitably qualified personnel.    It was envisaged that it would take some time to  develop this undertaking the beginnings of which would  be based in the United Kingdom for transfer to Iceland  in due course.    S.O.E. had established the closest relations with  O.S.S. in this country and were in favour of the proposal  now put forward.  REAR ADMIRAL BRIND said that from the point of  view of co-ordinating the operations of S.O.E S I.S  and P.W.E. on the Norwegian coast the Admiralty could  not accept the situation involving competition by yet  another authority. If the American proposal was agreed    it should only be on the condition that the operational    and strategic direction of their operations should come  under the Admiralty and that the channel of this control    should be via S.O.E.    Admiral Brind said that the Admiralty were particularly  anxious to safeguard S.I.S. interests in Norway.    After further discussion it was decided that there  would be no objection to the American proposal provided  that the conditions suggested by Admiral Brind were accepted.  These would require clear and tactful definition.    THE COMMITTEE -   Invited S.O.E. to prepare a draft reply    approving the American proposal subject    to the above conditions and to circulate    it for the concurrence of the Vice Chiefs    of Staff before despatch.    Offices of the War Cabinet S.W.I.   15TH MARCH 1943.    -3, ANWE.V    COPY OF A LETTER DATED 1VTH MRCH FROM    C.D. TO LIEUT. GENERAL ISMAY  I should like the Vice-Chiefs of Staff to know when  they consider General de Gaulle's letter No. 918/MP/2  to the Prime Minister that the groups who are at the  moment resisting labour conscription and have congregate '  in the more inaccessible parts of the country are-by no  means all of 1 he de Gaullist persuasion.    The one principal group which consists of-some 1 500     men and to which we hope to make a considerable delivery  of arms and food tonight35 is in fact mainly composed of  men led by officers in contact with S.D.E. They appear  to have been joined by a number of de Gaullists and we  have received wireless messages which indicate that they  have all congregated in the neighbourhood of EVIAN les Bains    It would seam to be advisable therefore not to give  de Gaulle himself any specific undertaking and for him to  be told that we the British will support all Frenchmen who  are prepared to resist the Germans regardless of whether they  own allegiance to de Gaulle or not. I feel he should be told  that the co-ordination of measures for providing this support  has been put in the hands of S.O.E. whose task it is.    S.O.E. have as far as possible always advised the  populations of the enemy occupied countries against a  premature rising since we cannot hope to provide arms and  food for all yet and since the repressive measures taken  are likely to have a serious adverse-effect on the assistance  we hope will be forthcoming when an Allied landing on the  Continent takes place. We have in this instance warned  those people with whom we are in contact to do everything in  their power to prevent the present wave of resistance from  spreading.  I suggest that the General should be asked to counsel  similar restraint amongst those ol his adherents in France  with whom he is in direct contact. Where revolt is  unavoidable it is suggested that the numbers who do so should  be kept to the minimum and that they should as far as  possible include only the more important members of the  organisations concerned together with their staunchest and  most determined followers. They help we can give is limited  and we cannot hope to maintain supplies by air to large  numbers of men all over the country.      C.0.S. 13 120 0 .  s  Flight subsequently hold up by  bad weather., 357    Yie have examined carefully what can he done to supply  bodies of men who have collected in inaccessible parts of  the country with the air resources at present available to  S.O.E. and also what could be done if additional aircraft  were specially provided.    Group Captain Grierson is fully briefed in the whole  matter and I am sending him along in case the Vice-Chiefs  would like to question him on any particular aspect of it.    -5, TOP SECRET CONFIDENTIAL LIBRARY    WAR CABINET   CHIEFS OF STAFF COMMITTEE    C.O.S. 43 0 MEMORANDA  101-200  YOL. II,  U S DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY OF HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY S GOVERNMENT 5'    The circulation of this paper has been strictly limited.   It is issued for the personal useof..   TO BE KEPT UNDER LOCK AND KEY   It is requested that special care may be taken to  ensure the secrecy of this document  MOST SECRET. Copy No.    l fat v-y jjdeeting 0/     12TH IvL lRCH 1945   Wiffi GjIBINET   CHIEFS OF ST.AFF GOMHITTSE   0 S.S. OPESATIOHS  IN NORWAY   Note by the Secretary   The attached Note by S 0oE. is circulated for  the consideration of the Vice Chiefs of Staff at their  next meeting     SIGNED C R PRICE   Offices of the War  Cabinet  S0W.l    12TH MARCH 1943   Annex   PROPOSED PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE UNDERTAKING   IN NORWAY BY O.S.S   NOTE BY S.O.E    aS submitted or is about to submit a proposal   fare 23 i94S Proposed Psychological Warthe  Nor way providing among other things for   he conduct of S.O. activities in that country.   is 0f this Ur srtaking O.S.S. of which S.O.  for ono e lon orresponding to S.O.E. have prepared a plan  have°n in Norway In discussion with S.O.E. O.S.S.  Parallli f S° .work wil1 normally be conducted north of  of the 'Mem e kas t een approved by representativ   Norwegian Govt0 in exile as well as by S.O.E. and O.S.S., are -  The objectives as stated by O.3.S.   3f   d subversive warfare   a  To carry on psychological and  activities in Norway.   b  To train operatives to accomplish the foregoing  objectives.   c  To obtain information in Norway necessary to  accomplish the foregoing objectives where such  information is not available from other sources.  4  In order to achieve these objectives O.3.S. will require   facilities to train their personnel an' to operate from this   country. This has been arranged direct between S.O.E. and   O.S.S. O.S.S. however hope eventually to establish a base  of their own in Iceland C or perhaps in the British Isles  from which they feel operations to Northern Norway might more  conveniently be carried out.  5 The Theatre Commander in the U 3. European Theatre of  Operations is being asked to give consent to the O.S.S. plan  subject to the approval to be obtained of the U.S. Joint  Chiefs of Staff in Washington and the British Chiefs of Staff   6 It is requested therefore that the Chiefs of Staff will  give their approval to the American plan and in particular  agree to the establishment of the proposed O.S.S. base in  Iceland c ., TOP SECRET CONFIDENTIAL LIBRARY    WAR CABINET   CHIEFS OF STAFF COMMITTEE    C.O.S. 43 O MEMORANDA  101-200  YOL. II, Tnn IS THE PROPERTY OF HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY S GOVERNMENT   The circulation of this paper has been strictly limited.   It is issued for the personal use of d..   TO BE KEPT UNDER LOCK AND KEY   It is requested that special care may be taken to  ensure the secrecy of this document  Copy No.  MOST SECRET.   //as considered at ft - d3 ' jb Meeting   n O.S 45 145 Ql. Th .   anTH MARCH. 1945.   WAR CABINET   CHIEFS OF STAFF C OMMITTEE   O.S.S. OPERATIONS IN NORWAY  Note By Secretary   T   The attached draft reply to the American proposal concerning   O.S.S. Operations in Norway has been prepared and circulated  in accordance with C.0.S. 43 45th Meeting 0 Conclusion 2.  2. The Admiralty are not in agreement with this draft reply  and had suggested the attached alternative  The War Office concur in the telegram as originally drafted  with an amendment to para 2 b which they suggest should read   as follows     b  S.I.S setivities in Norway are of paramount  importance and any operations undertaken by O.S.S  and S.O.E. must be subject to the approval of S.I.S.   3.  As the drafts are somewhat opposed it is proposed to  ASenda for consideration by the Vice Chiefs of Staff at their next Meeting    Signed L. C. HOLLIS   Offices of the War Cabinet S.W.I.  20TH MARCH 1943.     Annex I  h Annex II  V  ANNEX I   DRAFT   ois.S 11 6 r d-the P atlons of the  Norway dated 23rd December yi942 S1Cal Warfare Undertaking in   -1   /  /, 15G    The -proposals including the establishment of a se  in Iceland C are approved in principle subject to the  following provisos     a  All 0 S S. operations in Norway will be  subject to the approval and under the  control of S.O.E the Norwegian High  Command and as regards seaborne  operations the Admiralty   b  S4I S. interests in Norway are of paramount  importance and must be safeguarded carefully.  16th March 1943.    ANNEX I-I    DEAPT    1. The Chiefs of Staff have considered the implications  of the 0. S.S paper on Proposed Psychological Warfare  Undertaking in Norway dated 23rd December 1942.  2. There are already several authorities interested in  operations on the Norwegian coast namely S.I.S. S.O.E.  C.C.O. and P.W.E and they already cover the activities  which O.S.S. proposes to undertake. The Chiefs of Staff  regret therefore that they cannot agree to yet another  independent organisation operating in Norway.  3. The assistance of 0 3.3 in planning or in operations  concerning Norway is welcomed but it is necessary that all  their activities should be conducted through S.O.E. who  will co-ordinate them with those of other British  authorities and ensure that they conform to the procedure  and priorities already arranged.   o, TOP SECRET CONFIDENTIAL LIBRARY    WAR CABINET   CHIEFS OF STAFF COMMITTEE    C.O.S. 43 0 MEMORANDA  101-200  YOL. II, THIS DOCUMENT IS THE PROPERTY OF HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY S GOYERNMEJNT   4   The circulation of this paper has been strictly limited.   It is issued for the personal use of.....   TO BE KEPT UNDER LOCK AND KEY   It is requested that special care may be taken to  ensure the secrecy of this document  most secret.   4TH APRIL. 1945   W/ R CABINET   CHIEFS OF STAFF COMMITTEE   0. S. S. OPErL'.TIONS IN NORWAY  Copy of a letter elated 2nd April from Special  Operations Executive to the SccretaVyt ChieYs   of sTaff Committee   XXXX   The official reply to the American request for approval of  the projected O.S.S Operations in Norway put forward in C.0.S. 43  117 0 as approved by the Chiefs of Staff at their 75th meeting on  the 24th March Item 1 was duly passed to the 0 S S Headquartershere.   They -have asked us to elucidate some of the points in this  letter and I have therefore drafted a reply v/hich amplifies the  notes in the light of the observations made by them.   On receipt of this letter the O.S.S propose to quote it  to General Andrews and the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff' in  Washington   Before sending this letter a copy of which is attached  I would like to know that this interpretation of the official note  has the approval of the Chiefs of Staff   xxxx   Offices of the War Cabinet    Annex I, 280    ANNEX I    DRAFT    Dsar    1 Further to ray letter/ CD/4766 dated the 26th March 1943  and to the conversation hetneon Major Brev/er and Group Captain  Grierson of ray staff on the 30th March T would like to amplify  the official intimation that your proposals for the proposed  psychological undertaking in Norway are approved as follows    20 It may he understood that the Chiefs of Staff approval  covers not only your paper on this subject dated the 23rd  December 1942 but also the paper/ on the same subject dated the  8th March 1943 which was the one presented to the Chiefs of  Staff for'their consideration and in which you pointed out that  it would be necessary to train personnel and to operate from this  country as well as or perhapd instead of Iceland    -3. As rega ds para. 2 a of ray letter it may be taken that  the control by S.O.E. and the Norwegian High Command is governed  by our joint agreement forwarded to Colonel Huntington under cover  of ray 4243 dated the 14th January 1943 in which the following  sentence appears on page 2 para0 Bol -'     S.O. shall maintain its own administrative  offices with the O.S.S. Mission London but  all operational matters shall bo co-ordinated  through S.O.Eo and the proviso in para. 2  of ray letter reference 4226 dated the 14th  January 1943 which reads as follows   All S.O0 personnel for operation in Norway  will act under the control of the Norwegian  Collaboration Committee Q    4o I understand that Group Captain Grierson has explained  the interest which S.I.S. has in Norway and the necessity  'or all operations into that country to be subject to the  requirements for the collection of intelligence    Yours    Colonel David Bruce  72 Grosvenor Street  W 1o    / Annex II     Not reproduced  / Annex to C.O.S '/ v3 H7f0  x C 0 S. 43 45th Meeting Minute 2e  2 5, 281    i'JNTTEX  II    Copy of a letter dated 36th. March 1945 from Q.D..   fco O.S.S. H Q    X The Chiefs of Staff have considered the implications  of the O.S.S. paper on proposed psychological Warfare Undertaking  in Norway dated 23rd December 1942    2 The proposals including the establishment of a base in  Iceland c are approved in principle subject to the following  provisos    a  All O.S.S operations in Norway will be  subject to the approval and under the  control of 8.O.S. the Norwegian High  Command and as regards seaborne  operations the Admiralty   b  S.I.S. activities in Norway are of  paramount importance and any  operations undertaken by O.S.S  and S.O.E J ust bo subject to  agreement with s4t9s.  x C.O.S. 43 75th Meeting Minute 1     3', , /uv UumI yJshtM g    tu J\r   OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES    United States Government    London England    SUBJECT Project ' Westfield  23rd October 1943.    TO  Brigadier E.E.Mockler-Ferryman C.B.E. M.C.  Lt.Col.J.F.Haskell GSC     Attention is invited to para 3 basic communication  of 6 August 1943 entitled Report to Colonel D.K.E.Bruce  from Major George E.Brewer Jr. and endorsed approved by  Brigadier E.E.Mockler-Ferryman and Brigadier General James C.  Crockett A.C. of S G-2 ETO.    2. The preliminary phase of this Mission was concluded  on 14 September 1943 when Major Brewer submitted a report of  his reconnaissance trip to Stockholm which was approved by  Colonel Bruce.  3. Upon the basis of this report and also of a report  by the Chief Field Representative of the SOE Branch in Stockholm  to his London HQ full discussions have now been held between  the Chief of the Scandinavian Region of SOE the Chief of the  German Section of SOE and the Chief of the Scandinavian Section  of the SO Branch of the OSS.  4. As a result of these conversations the following  proposals have been agreed upon and are herewith set forth for  approval by the appropriate authorities of the SOE and the  Chief of the London Mission of the OSS  a That the OSS Mission referred to in para 3 of the basic  communication be given the code name of Westfield .   b That the Chief of the Westfield Mission be made  directly responsible tothe Chief of the SO Scandinavian  Section of the OSS London.   c That in all decisions of policy taken in London  affecting eitherthe composition or the activities of the  SOE Stockholm Mission or of the Westfield Mission that  their respective Chiefs in the field shall be notified  ji simultaneously in a communication issued jointly by the Chiefs    i  of the Scandinavian Sections of the SOE and the SO Branch of  the OSS and further that all questions of policy arising  in the field shall be submitted by the representative Chiefs  of Missions simultaneously and under joint signature to the  Chiefs of Sections in London.     d That all operations undertaken by Westfield and  all operations undertaken by the SOE organization in Stockholm  be considered in principle as joint SOE/SO operations but  that in general Westfield will concentrate its efforts  on spheres not hitherto covered or not yet satisfactorily  developed by the SOE and that among these spheres may be  mentioned Finland the Baltic States and Germany.   e That in consideration of this principle and in order  not tooverlap the SOE field of operations full consultations  shall be held between the Chief of the SOE Stockholm Mission  and the Chief of the Westfield Mission in advance of any  contemplated operations by Westfield or by the SOE which  might involve a dangerous crossing of lines and that such  consultations/, 2  3   consultations shall include the employment of agents the  making of contacts and other matters of a similar character.     f That the fullest possible exchange of facilities  shall be maintained between the SOE and Westfield Mission  such as -means of communication personal contacts  intelligence and the securing of transportation of material  and personnelj and that each Mission shall render the other  all possible assistance in the prosecution of their joint  enterprises.   g That nothing in this Agreement shall in any measure  prejudice the authority of the Chief of the SOE Stockholm  Mission or of the Chief of the Westfield Mission to exercise  full control over the activities and discipline of members  of their respective organizations.  5. It is anticipated that the MO Section of the OSS will  be engaged in Scandinavian activities in the future and will  desire to introduce field agents into Sweden for the furtherance  of these activities. Preliminary talks have been held between  the SO Scandinavian Section and the MO Chief suggesting the  desirability of very close liaison in the field. The general  nature of theunderstanding arrived at in these preliminary  discussions is indicated by the attached memorandum.   Sgd. Lt.Col.J.S.Wilson O.B.E.  Chief Scandinavian Section  SOE.    Sgd.  Frederic Cromwell  Captain AC  Chief Scandinavian Section  OSS London Mission. SO   Approved   Brigadier E.S.Mockler-Ferryman   Lt.Col.J.F.Haskell GSC, OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES   United States Government   London England   21st October 1943.  SUBJECT M.O.Operations based on Sweden.   TO Mr. F.Oechsner   1. It is -understood that some time after 1 January 1944  the M.O.Branch will have representatives in Sweden whose  operations will be directed toward Norway Denmark  Finland the Baltic States and Germany.  2. The SO Branch has established a Mission in Sweden and  is in process of setting up lines of communications  lines of supply and establishing essential contacts.  3. It is hoped that the M.O. representatives will avail  themselves of S.O. resources and services thus avoiding  the necessity of setting up independent facilities of  their own.  4. If these S.O. facilities prove adequate for M.O.  operations arran pnents for their use will be made by  request of the M.O. field representative to Lt.Col.Brewer  Chief of the S.O. Field Mission with the understanding  that all operational details contacts etc. will  remain under his control.  5. If on the other hand these facilities do not  prove adequate for M.O. operational purposes and M.O.  is obliged to set up its own independent underground  organization it is agreed that the M.O. field represent  ative will inform Colonel Brewer accordingly.   Sgd. Frederic Cromwell   Captain AC   Chief Scandinavian  Approved Section.   F.C.Oechsner  Chief M.O.Branch., OFFICE  OF STRATEGIC SERVICES    SO BRANCH    6th August 1943.  SUBJECT Report    TO Colonel David K.E.Bruce    1. In conformity with Colonel Vanderblue s instruct  ions -as approved by you and General Donovan -I have  made a complete analysis of my proposed mission and have  reached an agreement with the Director of the O.W.I.   thru Mr. Milton Eisenhower the Deputy Director whereby  the O.W.I. have guaranteed to give every assistance  requested. This agreement was reached during my recent  trip to Washington.  2. Upon my return to duty in the U.K. I have held  full and complete discussions with the appropriate  officers of the SOE and have jointly with them worked  out final details for this mission. It is understood  that the SOE not only desire me to undertake this mission  but consider that I am acting jointly for them and the  SO Branch of the OSS.  3. The SOE are especially desirous for me to establish  new and absolutely secure communications between joint  SO/SOE Hq in London and the field where I shall be  operating. Accordingly it is requested that I be ordered  to proceed on this mission and directed to take any  action necessary for its accomplishment.   Sgd.  George E.Brewer Jr.  Major AC    Approved   Sgd. James C.Crockett  Approved Brigadier General U.S.A.  G-2 ETO.   Sgd. E.Mockler-Ferryman  Brigadier., r   y-tz-lA   ADS/S SS  1st August 1943   To PS0.1  Copies to a D/Ptn Fvcmt A S   Would you pleas add the following Ifc css to th  Agenda for th Counoil Hooting on Tuesday 3 & g 43   0 8 S Opapational Qgoups   -O.S.3. a proposing to bring to this country in  th oax ly Autuen a group of bamty officers and on  hundred other rants for operations Into Morsay    Si 2 7 43 v/CD laid doon that Araerlesn Schools  rsast fe rospcosibl for fehoir swffi laaintonez but' -.  that 3 0 15. should help tdises to find a suitable sc oot  supply thssa until they can link up srith their oon  organisatims In this country and supply thasa with  training equipnont and devices but not standard arns  and a tciition.   Hoq-ulrod t  Authority for S.Q S to proooed on  th above linos., 5 I JUL    SN/1424. 30th July 1943.    TO AD/E. PROM SN.    O.S.S. QPERATIONi-Jj GROUPS.  Please refer to ADE/177 of 2nd. July 1943.    The question of accommodation for these  Groups is becoming a matter of increasing importance.  Major Brewer and SN/US have had conversations with  MA who has been in communication with D/FIN/l.    The latter states that to the best of his  knowledge the policy as to the degree of our  responsibilities for participating in the  arrangements for O.S.S. Training Schools was  still undecided.    Would you kindly take up this question in  Cornell so that the necessary arrangements  can be made to secure accommodation for a total  number of 20 officers and 100 O.R.s., ADi/m.  S/7/43.   i   8   To SlU  Promt a/dk.   Referenoa SR/S a rainuta of fcha SOth June  regarding the new C.5.3. training school to be established  in Scotland.   1. 'e m st certainly help.  2.   /CD has laid it down that American schools must he  responsible for their own maintenance.  3.  Oyr help should be   a  To find a suitable school work out and let  them know the staff considered necessary  and generally tuck them in   b Supply then until such time as we or they  can make arrangements to be supplied from  the nearest American depots    c  Supply them with training equipment and  S.O.E devices but not standard arms and  ammunition.  O.S.S intend eventually to establish a large  number of schools and we cannot be responsible for maintaining  them all., 3 0 JON Inti   rjo AD/E  From BN/S. 30th June 1943-   O.S.S.  . .D I refer to paragr&jii 4 o CD's letter to G.50 214 4f the 14th J-nury whan it was agreed that all supplies  training.facilities.available to the Norwegian  lollahoration Committee and B.O. will he pooled for the   enefit of Doth O.S.S. are proposing to bring to this   icuntry in the early autumn one group instead of three   comprising four officers and thirty other ranks.    .S.S. propose to establish a training school in Scotland  . Jor this party.   O.S.S. are experiencing difficulty in establishing Kie training school and would like our assistance    .is we shall be very pleased to give with your consent.  We would like your authority for S.O.E. to assist O.S.S    as required-by them to     a  Find establish and  school and all the necessary services   connected.with it.    b Supply vitals transport petrol and oil.  -   c Supply from time to time training equipment  explosives devices arms and ammunition.  voasi D/FIN informs me that the cost of any services which   . t.O.E. may render to O.S.S. should not fall on our secret   iKMUH-ote but should be left to the Treasury to decide whether   hey are to be treated as part of counter lease-lend or   charged to O.S.S., r    .t 4 ill Ma. iS44Mtu  iM. CU/iAtl v\  24th June. 1945.   T  10    TO  AD/E. FROM SN.     O.S.S. PROJECTS IN NORWAY.  OP&RATIONAL GROUPS see M/CD/1079 of 26.April 1945 .  1.  Three Norwegian/American Operational Groups  in all of 15 officers and 95 men have been recruited  and are in training in the U.S.  It is expected that these Groups will leave U.S. on  completion of their training between 15th August 1943  and 1st September 1943. O.S.S. intention is  to house them somewhere in the Scottish Highlands  sufficiently far from AVIEMORK so as not to interfere  with N.I.C.l. Three Norwegian Officers including  Lt. Stromholt have been asked for for attachment.    2.  Ihave said I could not guarantee any employment  ..  although there may be possibilities of four targets.  This is complicated by C.C.O's request for employment  of his men. I have stipulated that the Theatre  Commander should approve these Groups1 reversion to  ordinary Military employ after a certain date  say 1st October 1943 if no special employment is  then open to them.    3.  Lt. Col. VANDERBLUE has given his personal  that the Groups would not be employed in Norway  except under S.O.E s auspicies.  ICELAND.    4.  We are seeking expert advice on the advisability of  sailing M.P.Vs from SHETLAND to the Arctic Circle  and North via ICELAND.  This two-legged course is not as iantastic as it first  appears because it gives i totally different line of  approach under greater cover of darkness. If aavice  is favourable re-fuelling etc. will have to  be done in ICELAND.    5.  We are in ignorance as to whether O.S.S. has proceeded any  further with the suggestion for an ICELAND BASE.  6.  I am still concerned as to the possible employment of  U.S.  troops in ICELAND for a landing in North Norway.  TRANSPORT.    7.  We have suggested that O.S.S. best contribution  form of additional air transport for S.O.E.purposes or to  strengthen the Scotland-Stockholm service and ol w/T t  and other equipment. /] i, Si    2.  3.   cD/1079  f 26.4 43   ICD/1079 \tv 'j i I    To  SN through D/Plans From M/CD    taBia  ..    -   Reference Sli/062 dated 24.4.43.    There are two different aspects to be  consibered     a  The employment of Auxiliary Operations  Groups with American regular forces invading  Norway and   b  The possible employment of A.O.Gs. for  coups de main.  I exclude the possibility of infiltrating any  personnel of A.O.Gs. for resident work in Korway  unless some man is found who is lOOf suitable and  taken on by the Norwegian Government for this purpose.    If American forces are used for an invasion  of Norway they will certainly want to use A.O.Gs  and I consider myself that these could play an  Important role if properly instructed. This is  however a matter which should be taken up primarily  by O.S.S. with General Barker of the Combined Planners  as it is a matter for the American Commander l.T.O. S.A.  to decide upon being within his jurisdiction. I  have no objection to O.S.S. doing this but It must  be co-ordinated with Dh/Plans/M who is our joint link  with the Combined Planners. Should such A.O.Gs be \  brought over here they will not be our responsibility  for housing or adminiistration but we will have to  take a share in their instruction.    The question of the use of A.O.Cs. in coup de  main parties is much more difficult. If they w re  100R suitable by which I mean as qualified fox' the  job as your best personnel in L.I.C.d -then I see  no objection to their being used. That could onfly  be verified by seeiibg the men over here or sepning one  of your officers to America or getting General    llanetoen's, Hansteen1s representative to see them In America  Fleas disoussfeiiisvfith him. In-any case aga.ii  -we should not be responsible for their adminlatr, , Copies tojUgfiV i lV'     Copy sent to C 'jD/Flans  ' AD/S 14     . -SN  Circulate to HB /Af    MOST. s KCT A/CD  Hefs -CD/iMl . . CD/8eg '  7th April 1943. wftf A-  Further to 'fsy letter' CJ /4766 ttatec U e  S6th Karch 1945 snd to. th etenversatioa hotw en  Major Brewer fu -Gra p Captain &rl r da of- y staff  onthe30thiHtroh 1woulO Xtkoto'teplifythe  official iutiuaition fchst your proposals fer the  propoaeO Fsicjhological Unaertaking in Morway are  approved as followst   lt Kiay be lincierstood tiiat the Chiefs of btaff  approval covers not only your paper on this subject  dated the 25rd Deoesaber 1948 but also the-paper  or the oaae subject dated'the 8th March 1943 which  was the one presented to the Chiefs of Staff for thdir  consideratlcn and in which you pointed out that it  would m ne&essaxf to train personnel etui. b operate  from this country as well.a or perhaps instead  of Iceland..    As regard para 2 a of jay letter it a&y  be talseai tliafc the control by 8.0.1. and tl'ie  Norwegian High GesBaand. is governed by our joint  .agreement forwarded to golonel .Huntington under  cover of y Ciy'4E4S deted tiiie 14th Jifiauary .'-1943  In iflsich the following eentence -appears on page  .2 .para S li . ' /' /     ... 3.0. shall maintain Its own administrative   Officers with fcbe-Cv.s.Sj-Ifiasion London but   all perstiohal emitters shall be co-ordinated    sad the proviso in para 2 of-my letter reference  CD/4226 dated the' 14th January 1943 . which reads  ' a 'f Xla re     All s.n personnel for operetionsin, wi i  Norway will act imd&r the joritrol  tb Sorw gi a Collaborftbloc Goijsaltteo   aderstand that Group Cai tain  explained taa interest whibh  sad t .ie neeaaaifey ftjr all operati.oaa  aountry feo be abject t v the reciuirea  colloofcioa of -, ftifb r. to ]    /Plans  Aa/O 2   smwss.   . latli -reh 1943.   I aa so sorry that I have not feo-u able  until to-Iay to ac mo lodge llory s letter to  oa of the 13th larch toeotiser with n closures.   2. As to the icloaures I do not hinh  that th ri Is any aeod tax me to say anythingfua thor at the present stage.  3. I understand Sweot-lseott told youthis way ning that se shall ho very pleased  to seo both yourself and George Brewer on  Saturday.   SOD c.3.   Lt. Colonel v id Bruce, omaa op  S'fi irvrsoio m-cnem   miHKD ssatss   tmmi mamm   Maroh. 13  1943   Dear c Ds   A tshovt aote to cover tshroo pointst    to thank you oao raoro foi all that you  p x Bonttllyf &3 /our splendid organisation throughout are  doing and hesre always doa to .help us. i are Ksakias a serious  effort not to disappoint you. liow at long last we have auth  ority to proceed la each Thoatro . This may give us the inpotus  we need. I enclose incidentally copies of the doousente on  wlilch our autliority is hosed -including those relating to the  famous Korweiglau Undertaking.   Socotidl/ I wonted to say that I v just written a  i iaorsaiduTlid Savid Br'uee on the subject of the so.aing visit  of general uuL'ows m hope Oeiierol makers loaeral Barker  and Colonel urdway lou were gei'ierous to arrange this trip  and I aa sure we shall both benefit froi.. it Imeasurcbly fhe  General is right -om a is indeed a '1selllag job. I hope   incidentally the Oe ieral con 30. Ho is a super-sales.ion at  any tisae. bill the part/ bo too large if both navid and George  Brewer tag along   IHio last point is that I was very serious about the  invitation Jthe './blouei has extended to you orul General TIanatoonto  pay us a visit as O.fUS .guest . A oim/ige rlghi now would  do you a world of good and it would have mi electrifying offoot  on our orgBjftljj&tlaa at hoiae. I will send you an urgent cable.   With warmest i eptrds.   Faithfully    Signed  '.cilery 0. Huntington ji  Lieut-tola 001 \US, IteCti 121 1 345   oss-gfo   aiy Fo oo goaoeratloa   xo Li ut Coloni3i i'mvia K Bruo   1 la ecKmeotlmi witli iv la p oti m ferip so ktn&ly  igKHmapd &y 0.D 2 fehlaSs i al'xould bo giving &q m ea iOid s atioa  to tins aoet ps'actioal posoibi apj o-a.o x to ous Air Porws for aid   2 It has always sseaaftd to that w xoist he voj yspeolfi x isMtt he able to says neve 2 a area of ioexloen   respooaitoillty wixlefi we are asking you to aorvio 0 a oould   logically for osas 2 take too position that ' IM facilities  are heavily flmt ovaa If 5 to mm retjoired to  sexvio ml'j Vvaac CHorth and central the tow Ooaatrles  Poland and Oaeciioalovskia they would he hard put to It to do    f the job. we have been given definite sigQKieats in Kor-ay.- and now have orgcaiisatiOKiS to f-oaMieaa Franco Perhaps toey   can ho sactendsd to Southwestern Fs ncc It has boon proposed   therefore that m sox vice these Areas for so and ourselves   Just os they will strvie for boto our aooounts the other   terrltavies e -xtiaaed. '.uoh a proposal would fit reasonably   jinto what is likely to be fuo zones of . ilitary responsioilltyif & division is ever aade   5 m aoulA propose a very siuple iaitial uadertakinss   ae diversion of two JC-b s under 30nC ciircction to Stoddiola   to pic K up a m . out Eerweglan rs avaltit to bs meu if to   the dovornmnt' in- . ile and 06i   4 fids is a fs&ot-Fettiag Job At first our Air Force   will say -KUo special plceies -Alri .t there art Liberators   euipped with Had which if flaae d&. ened -d xt  he used on i KiO Ala Fore my even say i o special  crows1 doubt it. fhe first operation will send ttnsu   seurrying for spocial instructioo   5 iSie pattern tore will h the pattern in Algiers and Cairo    Ellery 0 SmtSagton J   Liout Colon0l AIM, COPY    SECRET     Ltr from Office of Strategic Services United States  Government 5 March 1943 subjects O.S.S. Operations -E.T.O.    AG 381 M 1st Ind CHB/ejd    Hq ETOUSA 11 March 1943    To Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee War Department Washington D.C.    1. Approved subject to the provisions of Paragraph 3 b.  basic letter.  2. Attention is invited to Paragraph 6 Directive U.S. Joint  Chiefs of Staff Ho.155/4/D dated 23 December. In this con  nection the A.C of S. G-2 is designated as the representative  of the Theater Commander and as such O.S.S. in this Theater will  function under the direction of this office. The A.C. of S.  G-2 will establish the necessary liaison for all O.S.S. opera  tional projects With the G3 Section.  3. Attention is further invited to Paragraph 2 a. basic letter.  It is understood that the T.O. mentioned thereinwill be based on  the T.O. Headquarters and Headquarters Detachment O.S.S. Annex  A. J.C.S. Directive No.155/4/D 23 December. An examination  of this T.O. shows that it provides the necessary personnel  and enumerates the grades and ratings for O.S.S. Branch Offices.  For the Commanding General     s C.H. BARTH  Colonel G.S.G.  Chiefs of Staff.  Handed to Lt.Col. Ellery C. Huntington Jr.  by Colonel SxHrmer Waite in the presence of  Colonel Bruce Major Brewer and Captain Bross  at Major Brewer's anartment S.lO.p.m. March 11  1943.     s Ellery C. Huntington Jr, S1012T     0   Sffl Y.    Ltr OSS U 3. sst ft l&ro i 1343. subjeetj 0 3 8  Opnrctlona l f 0 Bors glan UndortaklJag   o   m 381 ms 1st Ind CHB/aps  HC. CTOUSA -IX Marofe 1943  1X5 -Officer In oiiarg Office of Strategic service lontoa.    Approved . i  for the coocamuing. Genentl    cs mmi.   Colonel G3C  Chief of staff   Banded It Col fillwm G Huntington Jr   by Colonel 3uaa r Waite in the presence of   Colonel Bruce rajor Brewer and Captain Bros   at rajor Brewer % apparWuit 10 p a 1-arch 11  1943 with statement that cable sent  fSftd E.C.H.  Sllary c. lluatington .Jr   Sote original signed copies taken by Col. Huntintoa to  Washingtoii 18 lifts 48.    egd L.L.H, 21    S e H T   COPT.   iilaroh a IMS   ./ub..teoti 0 3 3 Ox ei etlono E.T.O -Korwaglaix tJndartaklag   Tos Ueut-Gon r l Vrunk M. AKSHBWS  G tmv l V 2 Forces T 0   london 'nglau4    1. ttmm Is uttMlieS beret copy or annp . . .tti  won 4ate liloh Sn being ubriitt d or lift baea aubiiitiod byBritish 3 C B to the feltlab Chief of 'tuff.  Z A pootoet&tio or duplicate copy of the Proposed  Psychological warfare Undertaking in Boiway referred to in  such sraorandust has already boon aubnltted to the Theatre  CoMBamdcr P.T.O. as here copies of photostatic copies of  letters dated January 14 and IS 1943 respectively con  taining the plait of operation agreed upon between reprooon-  tativos of the Itoreagiaa Governaont in Kxlle s.O.E. and  Qm 3 s mentioned in such motaenrandua   3. Cn the basis of the foregoing it la requeatftd  that the Theatre Contmnder i  &  Give consent to ouch Proposed PsychologicalWarfare Undertaking'' subject to receipt of  approval to such Undertaking as requested i  In the aooorandua aforesaid of even date -U  of the British Chiefs of Btaff hloh approval  aay b . coa nnioatod to -die United state Joint  Chiefs of Staff and the Theatre Bomaader S.T.Od  either directly or throuph 3 0 l i and   031  b.  Cable such consent to the United State Joint  Chiefs of Staff %  nil-ry c Huntington Jr.   Li ut-Coionel AU3    Special Ropressntailvw   Director. Office of  Strategic service, COPY   liareh 8 134C.   OlISP  riYCIKHOglCiOt VMlRkr.% wrjnB   1. 0.3. has stfsralttsd or is about to submit a proposal   teted DsooiKbar 2St 1948 oatitlod wPropo sd royehologloal  b arfare Undertaking in Uorwc providing anonc otter thlnrs  fOr the conduct of C.O. activities in that country.   In furtherance of this Undertaking 0.3.3. of which   3 0. is the section corresponding to r-.t.S tore prepared a  plan 3tor oporaticuic in H ay. in discussion with 3 0 1.  0 3 3. have agreed that 3.0. tork aill aormlly be conducted  north of parallel of 65° This plan has been approved to  representatives of the liorvegian Oort in exile as well as  toy a.o.E. and 0.0.8   3. The otojactivoo as stated toy 0 . .J. ares  a  to carry on psychological and subversive  warfare aotirJtiee in liorsayy  . to to train operatives to aecoraplleh the fore   gone objectives.    c  to obtain information in Uoway necessary to  accomplish the foregoing objectives where sash  Information is not available fro otter sources.   t    4. In order to achieve these objectives 0.3 8. vlll  require facilities to train their personnel anu to operate  frora  this country. This has been arranged direct between    ' O.B. and 0 3.3. 0.3.3 however hope eventually to  establish a base of thel mn in Xcoland or perhaps in the  British Islos froEi which they feel operations to i.orttern   lorsay might more conveniently be carried out   /s, 5 Th Tlicatr CoBmater in the U i. ''uyopoaa Theatre  of Operaticma Is lisiiig mWL to .t ooasoat to the 0 3.s  plan ouh j ot to the approval to ha obtained of tie U S  Joint Chiefs of staff in ashlngton and the British Chiefs  of staff   6 It is rocnest d therefore mat the Chiefs of  Staff will give their approval to the mmt&m plan ant la  particular agree to the aatcbliOM at of the proposed  0 S S has la I ela nd, , r .v.v '. ' '   lUlil   B' - r'.fv fills b ia -sso it mn ddeided ifo switt '   4 hr l0fbeartss with r s 8i4 to the as 'irai. of tbflfe   party.   / sti ioa a target ito-jW eiuysstlsated forthwith   T. c-8'  ''   r . v  . ' ' ' 1 'i -  . ... '' . i'   . J y V'r-- .    '' . / '' h   U4   -uS    4 /    1, COPY  SEC RET   OFFICE  OF STRATEGIC SERVICES  WASHINGTON D.C   December 23 1942   CERTIFICATE   This Is to certify that the attached is a  true copy of a paper entitled Proposed Psycholo  gical Warfare Undertaking in Norway now on file  at the Secretariat Office of Strategic Services.  This paper has not been formally presented for submission  to the Director Office of Strategic  Services for his approval   SECRETARIAT OSS    Sgd Byt  Duncan C. Lee  1st Lt N.M.B., COPY .eturn to Secretariat.   0 S. S  S .CHK'P  Sec'sm'Ber . 1042 Copy 2 of 2.   .1   OFi-ICS 01-' STRATEGIC SKiiVICES  PSYCHOLOGICAL AJir'AHli UNDERTAKING IN NORWAY   The Enclosure presents a proposed undertaking  submitted by the Office of Strategic Services for  Psychological Warfare in Norway. It comprisesi   1. A summary of the proposed undertaking.  2. Annex A -a fuller description and discussion  of the plan   a Appendix 1 -a list of equipment required  for these operations   b Appendix 2 -a list of OSS personnel to  be sent on this expedition for whom cormaissions  are requested.,  W JX   /v -5  -.u i    ECU T  To T /   \uOp G u j-'    ' rc ith fcv o copies oi a woaonRn uat dafln .ng  t '1 . pb.jc 'tologic&l w&r-ffcre 'andeptikking In  i c-jmsi.-/ rpf li iiiis not /ov been dis useod with  OolQiiel Kuutlrij/uon ns .x ii&e ox'iiy just bsen received   t iu not venm.-n & ieo rhetho ' the Joint C S. Chiefs  of stfitt have yet approved this awtentaduBi   Obvlonely 0. . r-eve very big views on Norway  saaa we site11 have to get this tied tip closely with  them before there is a. muddle. I shell put colonel  ilimtir rton iu touch with you ijtasedifefcely I have  already infomed his-tlatfc all action in aoxway will  licve to be cox .ti oiied by 8.0.E and that the Norwegian  Coverticxeat' agreoaent mist of course be obtained  befertohaiu in all matters., COPY    SECr.KT  Copy 2 of 2.    SUMMARY OF PHOPOSBD PSYCHOLOGICAL     TKWZi  iri iToT ay    A complete discussion of this  plan is attached as Annex A    1. The Office of Strategic Services presents the followinr  plan for psychological warfare activities in Norway.  2. Objectives   a  To carry on psychological warfare activities   S.O. in Norway.   b  To obtain psychological warfare Information   S.I. in Norway.   c  To undertake counter-subversive and counter  intelligence activities.   d  To-train operatives to accomplish the fore  going objectives.  3.  Line of Action  It Is proposed to establish an operational base in  Iceland for carrying on psychological warfare In Norway with  the assistance of the Norwegian Governraent-in-fxile and the  Norwegian underground.    Initial reconnaissance will'be conducted by a group  landed by submarine off the Norwegian coast. Recruits from  the local population will be transported to the Iceland base  for psychological warfare training and for subsequent reintroduction  into Norway as operatives and field agents.    4 Requirements     a  Air sea and submarine transportation for  delivery and supply of personnel and material   b  Cormsmnications equipment and facilities Appendix 1  attached .   c  Other material requirements Appendix 1 attached .   d  Replacement of military personnel furnished from OSS  Headquarters Washington to the Iceland base.   Appendix 2 attached .    & Requested Action.    That the Joint U.S. Chiefs of Staff     a  Authorize the proposed undertaking as outlined above.   b  Approve the procurement or requisition from  appropriate branches of the U.S. Government of the  supplies and equipment listed in Appendix 1 hereto.   c  Direct appropriate branches of the Army Navy and  other Government services and departments to cooperate  and assist in providing such transportation facilities  as shall be required and as shall be available.   d  Authorize the procurement objectives and allotments  for replacement of commissi oned and enlisted  personnel listed in Appendix 2 hereto.   e  Authorize the assignment of Service personnel of the  Office of Strategic Services including enlisted  personnel o the ' . .' ..5 to duty at the Teeland ' ase, COPY   SEGiiST Copy 2 of    AMEX A   PuOPOo D PGYt.i10LO'i 1GAL Utu .. IN NORWAY    STATEMENT OP TRK S1T0AT1ON    The number of persons escaping from Norway to England has  sharply decreased. This results from Increased vigilance by  the Germans and from a shortage of boats and all other means of  transportation. Escapes by fishing boats have almost entirely  ceased and plane service from Sweden has been so curtailed that  only a very limited number of the Norwegians who have fled across  the border can be brought Into allied territory for use in psycho  logical warfare. Moreover the Introduction by plane of opera  tives into Norway is becoming more difficult for two reasons     a the pace of Gestapo counter-espionage activities in  Scandinavia is continuously being accelerated and b the  British Bm facilities are already overtaxed.  In consequence of the foregoing all phases of psychological  warfare in Norway have been greatly impeded. A source of recruits  who have known the German occupation In that country by personal  experience has largely been lost to the United Nations and  valuable channels of counter-intelligence have been practically  closed.    It is believed that the United Nations base in Iceland offers  useful possibilities for the conduct of psychological warfare in  Norway and for the establishment of essential lines of transpor  tation and communication. At this base supplies can be gathered  and training undertaken.    2. OBJECTIVES  A. General  1. To  in Norway the specific objectives listed below.  B. Specific  1. To carry on psychological warfare activities  designed to harass the enemy including physical and  morale subversion and black propaganda.  2. To obtain psychological warfare intelligence.  3. To undertake counter-subversive and counter  intelligence activities.  4. To train operatives to accomplish the  foregoing objectives.  3. LINE OF ACTION  It is proposed that the Norwegian Government-In-Exile be  consulted with a view towards obtaining its cooperation and the  assistance of underground organizations in Norway. Thereafter  an operational base and headquarters will be established in  Iceland.    A submarine carrying the initial reconnaissance party with  supplies and equipment will then be dispatched to an appropriate, SECHKT  -2-Copy2of2    30    point off the Norwegian coast to be agreed upon with represen  tatives of the underground decruits will be obtnlned from the  local population picked up at designated points and taken to  the base In Iceland for psychological warfare training. Subse  quently they will be reintroduced by air or sea Into Norway for  carrying on the objectives listed above.    Direction of the operations of the operatives in Norway will  be the responsibility of the OSS Operations Officer in London  directly or through an Operations Officer In Iceland. In aldltion  to maintaining contact with the Norwegian Governmont-in-Rxile    effective liaison will be established with the Theater Command  British SOE and SIS.    4.  FACTORS  A.  Specific Difficulties  Personnel. This undertaking will require     1  a staff to administer the operational base  in Iceland   2  personnel geographically and linguistically  fitted for undertaking preliminary reconnaissance  and the establishment of initial contacts with  the Norwegian underground and     3  trained personnel for the conduct In Norway of  the psychological warfare activities listed above.  Cover. Military cover will be required for the  operational base in Iceland because of the American  Army occupation of that island. Cover for operatives  who enter Norway must be arranged with the Norwegian  underground.    Communications. It will be necessary to maintain  communications between operatives in Norway and the  Iceland base as well as between that base and OSS  leadquarters London    Transportation. Aircraft and seacraft will be  required for transporting men and material between  the base and Norway. No transportation facilities  are anticipated for operational purposes at the  Iceland base.    Equipment. Equipment and supplies will be required for     1  operational base in Iceland including headquarters  establishment and accommodations sufficient for  approximately thirty people   2  communication facilities between the Iceland base  operatives in Norway arid the OSS eoraraunica11ons  center in the British Isles and   3  the conduct of psychological warfare in Norway  including physical and morale subversion and  black propaganda.  B.  Resources  personnel. 1. Sufficient trained and qualified  personnel is available in the United States with which  to staff the Iceland base and to maintain communication, 3-  31    SECRET    there. It is proposed to us military personnel    consisting of approximately ten officers and twenty    enlisted men who will be assigned from the present    administrative and training staffs in Washin ton.    2. Personnel necessary for negotiations with the  Norwegian Goyernment-ln-.xile and for preliminary  reconnaissance and contact .aith the Norwegian under  ground is available. It consists of a iorwegian  Army officer and three Norwegian civilians. These  men would be permanently attached to the proposed  undertaking in a consultive capacity  3. The operatives to oe trained in the conduct of  psychological warfare activities and sent into Norway  will be recruited from the young men brought out of  Norway and Norwegian-speaking Americans and .ng1ishinen.  existing training facilities in ngland and the Cnlted  States will be utilised and a training base will be  established in Iceland.     over. liilitary cover for the Iceland base will be    arranged with the appropriate authorities of the United    States Army. Cover for trained operatives and field    agents who return to Norway will be provided through    the Norwegian underground.    cof.niurileations. Trained radio operators with portable    short-wave radio equipment will maintain communications    from  the field In Norway with the Iceland b&se. Contact    between Iceland and the OSS headquarters London will be    handled through existing radio ihscilities.    Transportation. U.S. Army Navy or com oreial sea and.  air transport will be utilised for transport from the  United States and England to Iceland. Air transport  seacraft and submarines for operations from that base  are under the control of railitery and naval commanders  in the area. It is proposed to request these authorities  to furnish the base with available facilities.    Equipment. The principal items of equipment can be  obtained from Army or Navy sources. Other equipment  including special supplies for psychological warfare  operations are obtainable from private manufacturers  subject to approval of OSS materials catalog. ee  Appendix for detail .    C.  Other Conditions and ..ontlnp encles.  replacement of Administrative and Training Cteff.  The establishment of the Iceland base will require  the assignment of personnel from the present adminis  trative and training staffs in Visahlngton. This assign  ment will seriously reduce the number of officers and  men available for adrainistration and training unstruction  at headquarters Washington anti procurement objectives  and allotments will be needed to permit the replacement  of such personnel. Enlisted personnel of the Strategic  Services Training Unit can be made available for the  base only'if the restriction is removed which prohibits  the assignment of such personnel to duties other than  training -particularly for duty in foreign fields.   See Appendix 2 for a list of replacement personnel, SECRET    Attitude of Rrlklsh Joint Chiefs of Staff and    U.S.  Theater Cormnander. Slops are now bein    tskeri.to ol tain the approval of-the British Joint  Chiefs of Staff and of the Theater Cocanander for  this undertaking..    Consultation with SQE. Negotiations will shortly bo  entered into witl Critlsh SOK for its agreeraent to the  contemplated operations and the use of British facilities  for communications and training of operatives and field  agents. No difficulty with respect to any necessary  final agreement is anticipated.    Cooperation with the Norwegians The cooperation of  the Norweglap Oovernraent-ln-. xile and of the Norwegian    underground is now being sought.    5.   iT glETT g e . Ti Qg  It is requested that the Joint U.S. Chiefs of Staff take  the following actionj    A.  Authorize the undertaking as herein proposed.  B.  Approve the procurement or requisition from appropriate  branches of the U.S. Government of the supplies and  equipment listed in Appendix 1 hereto.  C.  Direct appropriate branches of the Army Navy and  other government services and departments t'o cooperste  and assist in providing such transportation facilities  as shall be required and as shall b available.  D.  Authorize the procurement objectives and allotments  for replacement of commissioned and enlisted personnel  listed in Appendix 2 hereto.  E.  Authorize the assignment of Service personnel of the  Office of Strategic Services including enlisted  personnel of the S.S.'f.U. to duty at the Iceland base., SECRET    APP-.'iuix a   33   kjjipm ht    Available to OSS frotn Amy and Nevy sources   Living quarters houses or barracks for 30 mien eosuaissloned  enlisted civilian and students approximately one-half of  these being the headquarters complement the remainder being  the training school coiaplement and students including  furnishings linen mss equipment etc   5 'miniature cameras with accessories including dark room  equipment and supplies.   6 field glasses 6 or 8 power.   2 telescopes.   500 .38 caliber pistols.  25 000 rounds of ammunition for above.  1000 Thompson sub-ma shine guns  500 000 rounds of ammunition for above.  50 .45 caliber pistols.  2 500 round of ammunition for above.  O rising sub-machine guns.  6 000 rounds of ammunition for above.  6 M.l. Garand rifles.  3 000 rounds of ammunition for above.  Standard supplies of equipment for cleaning and repairing  all above sms.  20 000 hand grenades.    x    250 land mines  250 spools diokford safety fuse  200 spools of primacord  500 pressure -release switches  500 pull switches  730 rolls friction tape  100 rolls rubber insulating tape  100 rolls adhesive tape 1 inch   500 standard crimpers  550 jacknlves  1000 hunting knives and sheaths  100 3-cell flashlights  500 small flashlights batteries for demolition    3 sets extra batteries and 1 set extra lamps   f ryv 4 .ryVii- \, 2 SKCHKT    500 empty aandb ga n  10 light shovels  7&0 standard portable compasses  1500 first aid kits  250 special medical supply packets  1500 rations  Standard srations for 30 men for 6 months  Standard rations for 500 men for 3 months  100 special food rations equivalent to parts of 500 rations  Supplementary soap rations equivalent to rations for 500    men for 6 months  50 sets portable map making equipment  Assorted maps of Europe and Africa typographical navigation    tactical etc.  100 sets map reading equipment  500 sets field shoes underwear socks shirts  10 sets assorted charts showing uniform airplanes ships    and weapons of Allied and enemy nations.  2 sets each models all weapons  2 sound projectors and speakers including supplies    and replacements  4 portable screens  2 35 ram film slides and strip projectors  2 film mending and editing outfits  Signal Corps radio equipment for 10 students  250 coveralls  250 fatigue Uniforms  250 rubber helmets  250 spine pads  250.pairs heel pads  250 pairs crepe ankle bandages  250 pairs ''A type parachute large personnel    25 sleeping bags  50 blankets  50 thermos flasks  25 food thermos  250 parachutes -containers assorted, I.'uaT    25 dusmay -renades for training  2500 boxes safety matches  25 sets drawing boax ds map making and reaciin - equipment    for training school    Office equipment and supplies for headquarters including  radio station office and training school offices  Standard field equipment and supplies for headquarter    complement and trai ning school complement of an approximate  total of 50 men.  To be purchased from private manufacturers or owners  7 sets wire tapping equipment  6 ultra-violet desk lamps  6 flashlights with ultra filters  500 fog signals    500 universal switches  1000 assorted pocket time incendiaries  500 magnets  150 limpets  200 clams  1500 tubes of vaseline  100 striker boards  1000 magnesium incendiary  10 000 ft. fine wire gauge 014  6 rubber fold boats completely quipped    50 units knockout drops  600 units L tablets  15 000 lbs. plastic explosives  1500 time pencils assorted  100 spring cosh  150 Marlin 9 mm sub-machine guns  500 electric detonators  1000 non-electric blasting caps & 8  250 non-electric blasting caps 6  250 electric blasting caps 8  25 sets lock picking equipment  6 high pow v magnifying glasses   2 Winchester riot shotguns 12 gauge  200 rounds of ammunition for above, 4 Bren li.lvt machine una    5000 rounds of ajanunition for above    Jb    4 'ten sub-machine j'uns    5000 rounds of ammunition'for above    4     52 pistols  800 rounds of ammunition for above  4    .22 pistols Colt  4000 rounds of ammunition for above  4 luger pistols  300 rounds of a niaunltion for above  Small quantities of assorted demolition materiel    for training purposes    12 knuckle dusters    250 fighting knives    75 sq. yds. rubber substitute fabric    12 smatchets    12 scaling ladders    12 wall hooks    12 wharf hooks    30 pair assorted sizes gym shoes    300 benzadrine tablets    Equipment for one temporary radio field station        1 complete radio field station  iiacllo equipraent for training school.  20 X 35 portable radio  The estimated value of all items in Para. XI is 175 000.     This figure includes probably expense in setting up radio  stations in the field.  To be obtained without cost from the British by agreement    200 lead delays    100 camouflage suit    200 parachutes -containers assorted    ylacellaneoua    Boats and airplanes will be borrowed from our. own Allied Forces in  the theatre however it may be necessary to acquire up to three  Diesal- otored boats. Authority to acqui a same if necessary is  requested. Condition and availability of boats make reasonably  accurate cost or rental estimates difficult., \    TT    COPY   .u. pl .s .v   Duty  Comandlug Officer  Administrative Officer  Planning officer  Area Operations Officer  Conmunieatjons Officer    Dispatching Officer  Training Officer  Training Officer     Array  Coomunicatioris  Communications    Communications  Administration  Administration  Administration  Supply  Supply  Supply  Driver-mechanic  Dispatching  Dispatching'       Dispatching  Training    hPP SD1X D    .sj .L   Coanlasloned  Mujor or equivalent grade  Captain or equivalent grad.  Major or equivalent grade  Captain or equivalent grade  captain or equivalent grade  Captain or equivalent grade  1st t. or equlyalent grade  1st Lt. or equivalent grade    Enlisted    or Equivalent Navy Catlnga  Stk Sergeants  Corporals  Privates I'.C.  cch. Sergeants  Corporals  Privates P.C.  Tech. Sergeants  Corporals  Privates .C.  Corporal  Teeh. Sergeants  Corporals  Privates .C.  Sergeant    SKC SET    J7    Number    1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1    2   1    2   1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  2  4  1, VY\ krv    COPY    To AD/6 SO.655    From CM.175 26th December 1942.    iA trS    We enclose herewith memorandum setting out  the definition of Psychological Warfare as drafted  by G.50 218. We are informed that this memor  andum has been approved by G.50 000.    In view of the extent to which Psychological  Warfare is placed under the direction of G.40 000  in future as set out in the new Directive it is  interesting to see from the enclosed memorandum the  ground G.40 000 considers that Psychological Warfare  covers.     Signed GM.175        A' --   5A7    oTwzr 1   r, COPY SECRET    PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE.    Definition of Psychological Warfare.    The definition of psychological warfare as used herein shall  be as follows    The integrated employment of all moral and physical means  consonant with national political and economic policy and  coordinated with orthodox military operations which tend  to impair the enemy's will and power to resist or achieve  victory to deprive the enemy of the support of sympathy  of his allies and neutrals to increase the will to victory  of our own people and our allies and which tend to acquire  and increase the support and sympathy of neutrals.    Grouped as follows for convenience of reference psychological  warfare includes the following categories of operations.    Psychological Warfare PW 1 -Economic Persuasion.    Economic manipulations other than normal economic blockades  and measures directed against the enemy and orthodox trade  operations designed solely to influence neutral governments or  populations favourably toward the United States and her Allies  such as relieving economic stringencies through relaxation of  blockade or the contrary purchase of non-required products or  services to afford economic aid economic transactions and  activities which foster goodwill or relieve tensions and  exploitation thereof.    Psychological Warfare Two PW 2 -Open propaganda.    Directed primarily at influencing civilian groups or popu  lations abroad using as media pronouncements by prominent  officials statements and regulatory ordinances by theatre  commanders news manipulations through the press and radio  circulation of pamphlets publications and general cultural  propaganda.    Psychological Warfare Three PW 5 -Morale Subversion.    Directed primarily at influencing civilian groups or popu  lations abroad employing espionage black propaganda rumour  spreading designed to confuse deceive or intimidate bribery  and other morale destroying activities and consonant with  established national policy the manipulation of individuals  factions or partisans. Among the media for these activities are  word of mouth through agent clandestine radio subverted press  spread of subversive pamphlets or publications by clandestine  methods.    All the methods of deception intimidation subversive appeals  to superstition home-sickness hunger etc. with a view to  weakening the will to resist of enemy troops using such media as  loud speakers pamphlets posters sky writing.    Psychological Warfare Four PW 4 -physical Subversion.    Sabotage and other violent manifestations against enemy  persons or property activities designed to effect demolitions  spread confusion among enemy civilians or troops in key positions  and otherwise disrupt and soften enemy resistance organisation  and conduct of guerilla warfare by organisers fomenters and  operational nuclei in enemy or enemy-occupied territory.    Over/   /, i    Psychological Warfare give Fi 5 -Home Front Propaganda.    Directed primarily at our civilian population to increase  morale the will to victory using such media as     a  Military agencies prompt and accurate military  communiques news releases radio and movie  productions official statements and speeches by  prominent Army and Navy officers honours for  production accomplishments   b  Non-military agencies public statements and  speeches of leading officials news releases  radio and movie productions activities of  governmental agencies and civilian organisations  concerned with all phases of the conduct of war., C-tA'1-' 'i.V'   C L0SS C  frlPi-EP TELEeSMi DESPSTCHED TO KE YORK 16.12 42   U   fio-b   OS  YOUR 92614  n ORDERS CONCERNING SUBJECT HAVE BEEN ISSUED by NORWEGIAN  Hf'GH COMMAND TO THEIR HASHING ON OF ICE. /D    m further pressure is likely to have host unhelpful   U9 JI -   .J-J 5   norr ij 12 42e    .i G-FV'     U C-F V.-  AT   OHIQ1M, LOCAL 877    /   CIPHER TELEGRAM DESPATCHED TO NEW YORK 16. 2.42    C-L/i ss    no   nb    YOUR TELEGRAM 90712    sr   A. REGRET THAT U.S CITIZENSHIP AMD ENLISTMENT U.S ARMY  os    WOULD NOT MEET THE WISHES OF NORWEGIAN B.Q. THEIR ATTITUDE    IS THAT FOR THEIR OWN REASONS THEY DO NOT WISH TO ENCOURAGE    THEIR NATIONALS TO BECOME U So CITIZENS    B ALL NORWEGIANS GOING INTO THE FIELD FOF S.O.E.  UNDER NORWEGIAN DISCIPLINE AND COMMAND.    Ga GENERAL HANSTEEK FEELS IN ADDITION TO THE ABQVEfrHAT THESE  mil WOULD BETTER SERVE NORWAY AS SEAI8EN. IT IS POSSIBLE HE MAY  ASK HIS REPRESENTATIVE IN WASHINGTON TO EXPLAIN THIS TO .S.S.  BUT YOU SHOULD HOT ACT ON THIS INFORMATION    D. THIS MATTER SHOULD NOW BE LEFT FOR DISCUSSION HERE WHEN  G50214 ARRIVES.    TP AT 0025 17.12.42 EMC, 16 DEO Entd vr\ c x   AD/U.154 Gb.Ilfeom Court m/us 3akor Str t   ss. w.l.   JirMv /80 16th D o a'ti r 194S   1    TO SEE    AsAm you know we Mata kn have hsd a good deal at alamderafc& ndinc with our frlersl In Ataerlca over the questionof Lt CtrorniiOlt and seve al IloarwegiSfiB aeosam Siora Im  has trained for offensive operations   % entirely agree with your point of view about  the whole Matter oat wo are having ooosideraolo  difficulty in persuading our American friends to tudse  tlie oaae line.   In order to auks our position clear I would  suggest that your Military Attache in Washington shotild  got in touch with 0 S.S. headquarters and represent yourviews about the ealictaent of Norwegians especiallySerwegisn cociaen into tlw TJuftod States Arqy or  natu llslng Uam as Kmrlomm ln order to use t en  for raiding operations we huvo eudevoured to explain  to our' A .rican friends that these . orwegiMss .could  probably be ranch noro useful to th War effort if theywar enlisted into the Norwegian Mavy or th Earchant  Sdrwiee and that we had no pertioular need for their   use in the way tl.oy auggeot.   Perhaps If' your representative i . Amrice could  this point of view clear it would save a lot of  trouble   have also Just seen a telegram from flew Yank  indicating that J t. Sbz ast Xi ha o far received no  orders from you to proceed to Loalon Th&m tmmm  again to be aorae ralsunder-itenllng about this and it  looks to s as if your representative In Aaertce is not  mkia ' your InUmtlotis quite clear. Of course I my  be Mistaken in this but 1 thought 1 would let you know  how the m-tter appears to us.   General W Kunatoon., DCDO/187. 15th December 1942.  TO D/S. FROM D/CD 0 .    Reference your DS/81 dated 14th December I have  added a final para to your draft wire agreed with AD/O  and MG/US saying that the correspondence should be closed  and the question not re-opened until G.50 214 arrives here.  He is expected within 10 days., Cc-fm C    1 s f-' r WA 9 7   CIPHER TELEGRAM RECEIVED FROM NEW YORK DESP Tit 14 12 42-  ho4   RECD T 00 14 12 42.   9 /14   S' IY  A SUBJECT YOUR TELEGRAM NO 230 Of DECEMBER RTH HAS NOT     OS    REPEAT HOT YET RECEIVED ORDERS PROCEED TO LONDON.    0 %  h HAVE TELEGRAPHED DETAILS OF PRESENT POSIT ON.    TP AT 0554 15 12.42 JC- -, Reference cipher telegram 90712 dated 12th December  from New York.    Apparently O.S.S. does not Y rish to accept the decision  we have communicated to them in our telegram 2305 of the 9th  December which I thought made the matter perfectly clear.  I suggest you reply personally to G.50 214 and ask him to  drop his proposal as we cannot possibly go behind the back  of the Norwegian High Command in this matter.    We do not particularly wgnt to have these three  Norwegians over here as we have already sufficient of this  type of recruit though it might be possible to employ them  if they had special qualiffcations. It would however be  quite impossible for us to employ them were they made into    U.S.  citizens or soldiers.  I hope this correspondence will now cease.,  WtS Lo   SOE 60  TO ACSS ONLY    DESP 2232 12812 42  CIPHER TELEQRAH FR0l4 MEW YORK   RECD 0M5 13.12o 42   C   NO 90712   ij uiUG   YOUR TELEQRAM NO 305 DEC t .10TH   Si\   Ae fBo THINKS IT POSSIBLE TO ARRANQE FOR THREE JEN T0  MADE U S C TI ZE So THEY vOULD THEN COME TO U.K./AS ] S iri ENS   ENLISTF D IN U S. 'ARMY   Bo PLEASE TELEGRAPH YOUR REACTION AND THAT OF W/ COgNQ OF MY fl  GENERAL. STAFF TO THIS POSSIBILITY IN DOING SO PLEASp BEAR IN  mind para of f.Y 775 i   TP 0950 14 12 42 MLC -5, DCDO/145 9.12.42.   9.12.42    To D/S FroM D/CD 0    Reference your DS/50 dated 7.12.42 I have  spoken to GM and AD/u this morning and they agree  with your note.    Will you please have a telegram despatched to Hew  York in agreement with U. I attach suggested draft  but there is no need for you to refer your final one  to me.    As regards pera.E. of GM.175 8 telegram Ho.77505  this refers to air transport for Scandinavia both  for the Stockholm line and for dropping operations in  Norway or Denmark. Canfield suggested that this is  the best assistance O.S.S. could give us in Scandinavia  and he is of course right although it may be  distasteful to O.S.S., L 0 C A L HO 222 C- CIPHER TELECRAB DESPATCHED TO KEK YORK 9.12.42 u  2303  qf 'n 5 ppoB AD/6  ynni ttkac  --j  A. RFORFT BUST REJECT PROPOSAL.  8a EVERY HOfte-JAH CSX ZEM COBIBC TO THIS CGU ITEY UNLESS   OTHERWISE HAKTBALIZED OKES UNDER ORDERS of iORUEClAi'i COVERKKEKT    C. IF ENLISTED Vi U.S. FORCES ENDLESS'COHPLI NATIONS WOULD  EMSUE HERE. WHICH WOULD UNDOUBTEDLY SERIOUSLY AFFECT S.O.E /  O-S.S. RELATIONS WITH liOftWEft AN GOVERNMENT CTEATE SUSP ClOK  AMD NULLIFY THE PROGRESS WE HAVE SO FAR MADE.    Do HORHEGIAN GOVERKKEHT HOST ANXIOUS NOT TO JAYE KORWF.CfANS  RECRUITED INTO THE U.S ARMY.    TP AT 213''- 10 12.42. JC  OHISIN D/S, DC o/o    CIPHER TELEGRAM RECEIVED FROM NEW YORK DSSF.0012 6/12/42 50  RECD.0310 M  NO.777505  MY TELEGRAM NO.641 AND 4 OF NOVEMBER 27TH  FOLLOWING FOR AD/6 FROM 175  3  AJcnuJcoift c ' SCvomk d cS/V   A  THERE ARE 3 5AItJ S WHO WERE TRAINED BY AND WHOM G.50 000  ORGANIZATION IS ANXIOUS TO SEND TO UNITED KINGDOM FOR FURTHER  TRAINING.    B  G.50 000 ORGAN JATSON suggest THAT these men who WOULD COME  TO THE UNITED KINQDOM as PRIVATES IN UNITED STATES ARMY MIGHT  EVENTUALLY BE JSED ESTHER IN CONJUNCTION WITH YOUR EXISTING  ORGANIZATION OR 7POSSIBLY IN CONNECTION WITH ANY OPERATION  WHICH MIGHT BE JNDERTAKEN BY xTlF AND WHEN HAVING BEEN '  ACCEPTED BY YOU AND BY VHcQ. HE RETURNS TO UNITED  KINGDOM AFTER HIS RECONNAISSANCE    C.  G.502% WHO UNO IS AND7KNOWS THAT HE WAS ASSOCIATED WITH BONDED  MEN HAS TASKED rOR THEIR PARTICULARS WHICH G.50.000 ORGANIZATION   HAS NOW CABLED TO HIM.  WE HAVE 7P01NTE L fUT THAT YOU APPARENTLY DO NOT 7REQUIRE  RECRUIT7S FOR AT PRESENT BUT AS G.532I CGRP.MUT HIMSELF  HAS 7PRESSED US TO TAKE THIS UP WITH YOU WE FELT COMPELLED TO ASK  YOU TO g SiDER THIS PROPOSAL AND IF YDU AGREE TO PUT MATTER  TO Q    /SoOLTxWifliiJifl-  FOR YOUR PERSONAL INFORMATION G 5021 HAS TELEGRAPHED r  G 50 OOO ORGANMATION CAN MAKE TO OUS WORK IN Z S TO HELP  IMPROVE OUR COM 1UNICATION7S WITH U.K. THIS APPEARS TO HAVE  CREATED UNFAVOURABLE IMPRESSION WHICH ACCEPTANCE BY YOU OF  THIS PROPOSAL WOULD DO SOMETHING T3 CORRECT.     MY IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING TELEGRAM.    TP  1635 6/12/42 WN     THAT You F &L B 'rr 'f CoNTRi QOThU'J tr. QJsOO, I suggest that this wordy exchange of telegrams between AD/U  and G.M. should now cease as they are evidently at cross purposes  and the question of Lte. Stromholt does not really concern AD/U but  Is a matter entirely for the Norwegian High Command and the  Scandinavian Section.    I think that in future communications on this subject between  London and New York should be carried out at this end by MG/US in  your namejand in consultation with myself and SN section.    The matter is really quite simple but is giving rise to a fog  of communications.    I have spoken to MG/US this morning about it and I am seeing  General Hansteen on Monday regarding the possibilities of Lt.  Stromholt's employment., 1C    local Q97 52    CIPHER TEL DESP TO NEW YCUK 4.12.4 CkM6. C    NO 2230 -   FOR0M 175 FROMAD6    YOUR 72902.    A FACTS ARE AS STATE IN OUR 21    B THERE 13 A POSSIBILITY THAT SU  NORWEGIAN ORQAN5SATtON BW THIS WILL  C. N C S DECISION A TO HIS PUT  here    CL PENDING THAT DECIS ON IT WOULD  INDICATE ANY .GREATER PQSS BILITY THAN    n is 50 216 IS FULL ACQUAINTED  CABLE WHILE GIVING A SLIGiTLY MORE HO  POSSIBILITY OF EMPLOYING.SUBJECT DOES    TP AT 2340 4.12.42a HQ    ORIGIN AD6    tob    SN    \L    r/n'   ijECT WILL BE FITTED INTO   EPEND UPON NORWEGIAN  fRE AFTER SUBJECT HAS ARRIVED    BE MISLEADING FOR US TO    WAS GIVEN IN OUR 2181.    WITH SITUATION AND HIS    'EFuL IMPRESSION OF THE    NOT A.-TER THE FACTS., IflMSr  \M&-        lvkS 1US    LOCAL NO 775  CIPHER TELEQRAM FROM NEW YORK DESP 2302  RECDc 0615 3 1 o42.  72902  a  FOLLOW NO FOR C1SM PERSONAL FROM  u  GtVs  ftp 4  PS  REFERENCE AD/U'S TELEGRAM 181 NOVEMBER 30TH To YOU   As IT SO HAPPENED THAT BEFORE WE RECEIVED ABOVE TELEGRAM WE  WERE SHOWN COPY OF TELEGRAM 30171 NOVEMBER 3GTHL SENT BY  TO OoS S   G. M McrU    n AT uBS. 50216 s telegram which ss said to have been s approved y     IS NOT THE SAMS' AS AD/U S 181 SINCE IT STATES THAT YOU  . ANTICIPATE THAT Y CAN BE FITTED INTO Z ORGANISATION WHEREAS NO  SUCH SUGGESTION IS HADE IN AD/U S 181 U kl WcTY-UrE    WOULD DRAW YOUR ATTENTION TO DANGERS OF THIS KIND OF PROCEDURE  lF WE HAD HOT SEEN TELEGRAM 30171 WE SHOULD HAVE SHOWN OUR   IV   TO O.S.So WHO WOULD HAVE BEEN FOCED TO CONCLUDE EITHER THAT    §    CPJ LONDON WAS TELLING G 5021C A DIFFERENT STORY FROM   HAT THEY TOLD US    OR    CED LONDON DID NOT THTNK' IT NECESSARY TO KEEP US FULLY  INFORMED    t  t MEANwiLE IT WOULD ASSIST IS IF Yi OULD ASCERTAIN AND TELEGRAPH  JS wrti'CH VERSION WE SHOULD 'AKE AS BASIS IN OUR DISCUSSIONS WITH    o s s .    -KT-..IMMEDIATELY. FOLLOWING TEl-EGRAMt    TP EYW 1930 3. 12 42., 7 DEG Entd    DS/50. 7th December 1942    54   TO D/CD 0 PROM D/S.  Copy to SN.    Reference my DS/43 of the 5th December on which  you have taken action with U. I see that another  telegram No. 77505 from New York dated 6th December  has now arrived mentioning three Norwegian sailors  who have apparently/ been trained by Lt. Stromholt and '  whom the G.50 000 organization wish to send to the U.K.  as privates in the United States Army as possible  recruits for us.    I suggest that you make it quite clear to New York  that every Norwegian returning to the U.K. comes under  the orders of the Norwegian Government and it only com  plicates matters very badly at this end if he enlisted  into the U.S. Army of course if he is a U.S. citizen  it is a different matter and we should not want to use  him.    We are far more anxious to receive Norwegian sailors  here as sailors and not as 'gun' men trained by Lt.  Stromholt.    I spoke to-day to General Hansteen about this  matter in general and he is very anxious not to have his  Norwegians either sailors or soldiers recruited into  the U.S. Army. In fact his Government has already an  agreement to that effect with the U.S. authorities.    I am not quite certain what paragraph E. of H.M.  175' s telegram No. 77505 of the 6th December really  means but he seems to have got the whole matter muddled  up and I think the sooner it is taken out of his hands  and those of U. the better. We do not want out relations  with the Norwegian Government and the Norwegian Commanderin- Chief impaired by this American line of action.    As regards Stromholt this officer has been ordered  by General Hansteen to come to England to report to him  here when a decision can be made as to how his services  can best be made use of., Norwegian Operations.    The attached is a proposed draft of cable to  be sent to S.O. Washington through our channels.  SN has been consulted and approves the draft.    I understand Mr.Hoover head of S.I. Scandinavian  Desk of O.S.S. has an appointment with you at 16 hours  today. I should appreciate a word with you before  then., inrc- -/V-jr-  ' 3.  PC Entd   PARAPIffiASE of Cable sent to WASHINGTON   November 30th 1942   5   The despatch of the following message has been approved by  BAKER STREET. Concerning STROMHOLTs   A.  It is believed that an unfavorable view of STRCMNOLT  taken by the NORWEGIAN HIGH COMMAND is the result of  a misunderstanding.  B.  General HANSTEEN NORWEGIAN COMMANDER IN CHIEF is  perturbed by the receipt of certain correspondence  forwarded through the WASHINGTON NORWEGIAN LEGATION.  STROMHOLT figures in this correspondence which concerns  the formation by O.S.S. of two companies recruited from  NORWEGIANS and NORWEGIAN AMERICANS. It had been  HANSTEEN's understanding from Colonel FREDERICKS that  O.S.S. had stopped all subversive action in NORWAY.  C.  The suggestion made  that he be promoted has also been viewed unfavorably  D.  STROMHOLT is being recalled by General HANSTEEN and it is  felt here that this is the best way of clarifying this  misunderstanding.  It is anticipated that STROMHOLT can be fitted into the  NORWEGIAN organization as you suggest after this case  is adjusted in which particular adjustment BAKER STREET  will cooperate fully.  F.  Please advise date of STROMHOLT's departure and acknowledge  this cable, LOCAL NR0 349  CIPHER TELEGRAM DESPATCHED TO NEW YORK GLEAM.  NO 2181 30.11.42    ..175 F0OM AD/U. UL  YOUR 64127 p    he THE NORWEGIAN COMMANDER INCHIEF INTENDS TO RECALL OFFICER    IN QUESTION TO THIS COUNTRY WHEN IT WILL BE DECIDED HOW BEST HIS    SERVICES CAN BE UTILISED.    B. THIS STEP IS BEING TAKEN AFTER CONSULTATION WITH OUR NORWEGIAN  SECTION.    I I XppT  TP AT 2340 30.11.42 JL   J r '    RfGIN AD/U., CYPHER TELSGR/H FHOH ORK   ftLEAM o   AD/U FROf- i G M 175   -\n MM c &MX 0US v . . feD ao. .IK    ri   mtr-c' tjka'h FUTURE SUBJECT MY TELEGRAM 924 OCTOBER 23rd   4  4 &Lf    PARA B VfflO HAS EXPERT KNOWLEDGE OF BONES AND NARVIK  AREA WITH A VIEW TO HIS BEING SENT TO THAT DISTRICT TO    0  MAKE A RECONNAISSANCE AND POSSIBLY TO ORGANISE  RESISTANCE GROUPS OR ACT AS INSTRUCTOR IN SUBVERSIVE -   METHODS.   s rT u.e per fY 1EXCVGLPNT Q 50 0flC' PREL1MINAR PAR A   fSoSIYU -.  &SKi& &°goi ™kS'SjlIuSIjyIIIIs t 2'™ r PECT  mot OBJECT TO. HIM BEING liSfcU M--i tr UxLH vc. Gofc.u   t  t   PLEASE TELEGRAPH WHETHER  CA NORWEGIAN GOVERNMENT WOULD AGREE TO FROPt SED USE OF sObJeLTC   / ca YOU COULD FIT HIH IK TO OUR NORWEGIAN ORGANISATION-OK  1 f BASIS OF LONDON AGREEMENT   REQUIRE SOME REFRESH R TRAIN IMG IN  r.  SUBJECT WOULD Op COURS  .UNITED KiNGDON  MY IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING TELEGRAM.   tp 1625 2B 11 i 4'2 mfI  -5-' NOTE FROM 'CODES jTnT.   36 CROUPS OMITTED. uORRLCTIOit AWAI iJU, MG- 0'S  59    LOCAL il6  CYPHER TELEQRAM FECD FROM NEW YORK DESP 2014 27 11 j42  FECD. 0310 28 11 42  6422     s LG. LEAHc AD/U FROM Q.H. 1 5     .A REALISE YOU WILL PROBABLY RAISE TWC OBJECTIONS VIZ    CA  SUPPLY CF PERSONNEL IS ADEQUATE CYQUR TELEGRAM 937  NOV913 r PARA S3     z-j.io.tf7. CB SUBJECT IS PERSON AtNON GRATA WITH YOUR tELEC RAM   - 592 OCTOBER 20TH PARJt D ' L ' 5    B0 WITH REGARD TO PARA A CA URGE YOU 70 CONSIDER SUBJECT S  VERY SPECIAL KNOWLEDGE OF DISTRICT CONCERNED AND THAT HE IS GOOD  OFFICER TYPE. HE ALSO HAS A NUMBER OF RELATIONS IN DISTRICT      C. AS TO PARA A C3 G.50.0CC IS ASSURED BY NORWEGIAN Y M  WASHINGTON THAT VIEW TAKEN 8Y NORWEGIAN GOVERNMENT IN LONDON MAY  BF DUE TO MISUNDERSTANDING i.E. SUPPOSITION THAT HE HAS SIMPLY  BEEN HAVING A GOO TIME IN U.S.A. WHEREAS HE HAS IN FACT BEEN  WORKING AS G 50 000 INSTRUCTOR WITH PERMISSION OF NORWEGIAN   GOVERNMENT OVER HERE, LOCALS402.  CIPHER TELECRAM DESP. TO NEW YORK C E A M . 1 11.42.    2937     ASi L   Q.M. FROM A.D.U. REFERENCE YCUR 16904.  tifC  THE POSSIBILITIES AS RECARDS EMPLOYMENT OF O.SoS.  PERSONNEL ARE AS FOLLOWS. v 'w    Htfccu jt cA utAd 6 GLcr A rvxUUe\   B. IN 'A. S6 CT D AND ET THE lNTS GOVERNFEfCONCERNED  EXERCISE STRICT SELECTION OF PERSONNEL SO THAT  MATTER IS REALLY NOT IN OUR HANDS. IN ANY CASE  SUPPLY IS AT PRESENT ADEQUATE.    T M Ua aM t\aAA.Ct    IN F. AND CL SELECTION IS DONS'. ENTIRELY BY OURSELVES    AND THERE IS NO RESTRICTION AS IN PARA. B. ABOVE.    ALTHOUGH WE HAVE ENOUGH RECRUITS FOR THE MOMENT WE ARE    PREPARED IF IT WILL HELP YOU OR G.50 000 TO ACCEPT    IMMEDIATELY SUITABLE RECRUITS FOR TRAINING. WE DO  STRONGLY DESIRE HOWEVER TO HAVE O.S.S. OFFICERS HERE  AS SOON AS POSSIBLE IN ORDER TO HANDLE THEM DURING  TRAINING.    D.  REFERENCE PARA. C. OF YOUR 16904 CUR POLICY FOR AL  WAS NEVER THAT WE COULD TREAT T AS IF THERE WERE  NO GOVERNMENT OF THAT COUNTRY HERE  E.  FOR SPECIAL PROJECTS AS COUPS D MAIN SUCH AS HY  WE CAN ALMOST ALWAYS FIND EMPLOYMENT FOR O.S.S.  PERSONNEL BUT SUCH PARTIES SKO ILC BE A COMPLETE  SMALL OPERATIONAL UNIT AND THE DANGERS OF SUCH  OPERATIONS ARE CONSIDERABLE. FOR THS TYPE OF PERSONNEL  ALSO WE DESIRE O.S.S. OFFICERS N OUR OPERATIONAL AND  COUNTRY SECTION STAFFS.    THE WHOLE OF THIS QUESTION WOULD BE  INFINITELY EASED IF THERE WERE . S. GEOCRAPHICAL  DESK OFFICERS HERE TO SEE THE PJOtLEM AND TO DISCUSS  WITH US AND WITH ALLIED GOVERNME T1 WHERE THEY ARE  CONCERNED.    Qc  HOPE THIS MAKES THE POSITION CLEAR.    H  SEE MY IMMEDIATELY H .LOWING TELEGRAM, LOCAL. 421.   14.11.42  CIPHER TELEQRAM DESPATCHED TO NEW YORK    2938.   PRECEDING TELEGRAM.   SEE MY IMMEDIATELY    hR   IS CZECHOSLOVAKIA   A. IS NORWAY E  U    IS DENMARK.   B. IS BELGIUM F  IS FRANCE.   IS HOLLAND. G.   C.  IS KNABEN.   IS POLAND. H    D.  14.11.42 DR  TP COPIED AT 1455, 62    'MG.t  MG.2  MJPOL  M'Ssc.  MfReg.   LOCAL NO 125  CIPHER TELEGRAM RECEIVED FROM NEW YORK  NO 16904    f MPORTAN1    TO AD/U FROM    YOUR TELEGRAMS 592 699 736.    /     -   gK i.    DESP 1054 4 11 42     M   RECD 0600 5.-11 42    THINK IT ESSENTIAL THAT WE SHOUL D CLEARLY UNDERSTAND YOUR  POLICY REGARDING EMPLOYMENT IN fcESTERN EUROPE OF PERSONNEL  PROVIDED BY 0 SoSo AS MAY HAVE IMPORTANT DEFINITE    EFFECT 08 OUR RELATIONS WITH 0    SHALL THEREFORE BE GRATEFUL IF A    CONFIRM OUR PRESENT UNDERSTANDSis    AS FOLLOWSs    f lCu Cx vD   1  A6.Boland c.' you do not  GsSeSo IN U S0A EXCEPT  PROJECTS IN CASE OF NORWAY  699 PARAGRAPH E FOR A A    MY IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING TELEGRAM    SoSo    3 SOON AS POSSIBLE YOU WILL  5 OF YOUR POLICY WHICH IS    REPEAT HOT REQUSR i B/f RECRUITS FRJf   OR D AND OTHER SIMILAR  A 592 PARAGRAPH B AND  ND C Ac 36 PARAGRAPH 8    &    r, LOCAL m 1.34  1 FHEiP TELEGRAM RECEIVED FROM NEW YORK  NOo 17004   DESP    RECDo    m immediately precediNQ TELECRAMb   3 f    ' v I AND F you REQUIRE FROM O.S.S. IN U.C A .. ONLY REPEAT  wptm Ctm5vC H .TS A iRf ACCEPTABLE TO RESPECTIVE GOVERNMENTS     .Fifc.T R n 2 ARE C AND H. CITIZENS .OR NOT SEE YOUR TELEGRAM    5   ' 0 & 3 fe1 a 0 cZcti.   P /Iccu.ct 'y Ckecl.0 .   J AND J WILL PRESUMABLY BE TREATED IN SAME WAY AS 2    /cfsOV i% .   P&P4 T' r-   f\cnujCL j -sQua.    r 1HIS UNDERSTANDSNQ ICORRECT IT-APPEARS TO REPRESENT REVERSAL   .T POUOy AS REGARDS /. 8T AND CL FOR AT THE TIME LONDON r IRST AND  ' jj FAR AS WE ARE AWARE EVER SINCE IT HAS SEEN UNDERSTOOD THAT IF    DoS.S COULD FIND SUITABLE REPEAT SUITABLE POTENTIAL AGENTS FOR  FHESE COUNTRIES THEY SHOULD BE SENT TO-UNITED KINGDOM FOR FINAL  1RAINING AND INFILTRATION PROVIDED ALWAYS THEY REMAINED PART OF    ONE FIELD FORCE    MY IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING TELEGRAM    NO 17104    DESPo 2142 4.11 42  RECD. 0430 5.11 42    m IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING TELEGRAM.   ha FRANCE  B NORWAY  CL DENMARKc  DA K N ABEN.  Eo BELGIUM  F HOLLAND  Ga BELGIAN  Ha DUTCH  I a POLANDe    CZECHO-SLOVAKIA.    TP AT 1122 5 11 42 Ul., LOCAL 6 3Q  cipherTELEGRAM DESP. TO NEW YORK 30fl10.42.    1736 '' \  f M H E D I A T E u  ua afca i ta aerxe jjio s 96 MstlaKe   TO GcH FROM AD/U    REF YOUR 98728a    1B IN ALL CASES WHERE GOVERNMENT OF AN OCCUPIED COUNTRY S3  REPRESENTED IN LONDON THE HEN SELECTED FOR S OeE. WORK ARE RECRUITED  AND EMPLOYED IN FIELD BY MUTUAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN S 0 E AND  GOVERNMENT CONCERNED 'ON ALL HATTERS INCLUDING OPERATIONAL ROLES    2& SUCH RECRUITS DO NOT SERVE UNDER BRITISH ORDERS BUT UNDER    ORDERS OF THEIR GOVERNMENT ON JOINT ORDRE D MISSION AGREED    WITH SsOsE'a    3c SELECTION.AND DESPATCH OF AN 0 S.S RECRUIT TO THE FIELD    IN SUCH CASES THEREFORE REQUIRES AGREEMENT OF SoO. -O.S.S.  AND GOVERNMENT CONCERNEDo    4 HENCE A RECRUIT WHO IS UNACCEPTABLE TO THE GOVERNMENT    CONCERNED OR WHO WILL NOT TAKE ORDERS FROM THAT GOVERNMENT  CANNOT BE SENT INTO THE FIELD AND IS THEREFORE OF NO USE    5c IT WILL THEREFORE OBVIOUSLY BE VERY-DIFFICULT TO ARRANGE  DESPATCH OF ANY O.S.S. RECRUIT TO THE FIELD UNTIL AN OFFICER OF  0 5 S IS AS YOU SUGGEST ATTACHED HERE TO THE REGIONAL HEAD  CONCERNED THIS IS OUR FIRST REQUIREMENT    THUS-WE AGREE IN GENERAL YOUR PARA C WITH ABOVE PROVISOS    7 IN VIEW OF ABOVE USELESS TO USX SEND OVER RECRUITS UNTIL  OaS.S REPRESENTATIVE HAS BEEN ATTACHED TO D R AND  SCANDINAVIAN SECTION AND GAINED FIRST-HAND INFORMATION AS TO  PROGRAMME AT PRESENT BEING CARRIED OUT WE AMD HE WILL THEN BE    IN A POSITION TO DECIDE.WHETHER ADDITIONAL PERSONNEL FROM ysS0jU  COULD BE USEFULLY EMPLOYED AND WOULD DISCUSS PROPOSALS WITH  GOVERNMENT CONCERNED WHERE SUCH EXISTS IN LONDON    AT PRESENT TIME THERE SEEMS' AN ADEQUATE. SUPPLY OF RECRUITS  HERE FROM ALL COUNTRIES IN WESTERN EUROPE TO MEET NORMAL S O.E  REQUIREMENTS INCLUDING FRANCE AND DENMARK WHERE NO  GOVERNMENT IS CONCERNED    TP AT 1950 30 10 42 HCK,  03ct k-c rjy- TO A G S S ONLY  CYPHER TELEQRAM RECD FROM NEW YORK DESP 104 28 10 42  RECD 1630 28 10 42  98728  0AS L  TO AD/U FROM Q M U   REFERENCE MY TELEQRAM 924 OCT.23RD PARA Bc   'S  Q 50214 HAS BEEN QOINQ THR0QH LIST OF RECRUITS TAKEN ON BY  U 0 208 WHO HAVE RECEIVED PART'bp THEIR TRAINI IN e 50f208sS  SCHOOLS WITH A VIEW TO SEElNQ IF ANY OF THEM ARE' REALLY SUITABLE  FOR USE ON S.O. AS OPPOSED TO QUERlLLA OPERATIONS    B UNDERSTAND WE SHALL SHORTLY RECEIVE LIST WITH REQUEST AS  TO WHETHER WE CAN USE SUCH RECRUITS UNTIL WE RECEIVE LIST WE  SHALL NOT REPEAT MOT KNOW MAXIGNAUTY OF STUDENTS BUT BELIEVE IT  WILL CONTAIN NORWEGIAN FRENCH BELGIANS AMD DUTCH CREWS POSSIBLY  ALSO HUNGARIANS     Ci ''LINE WE HAVE TAKEN SO FAR AS'CONCERNS WESTERN -EUROPE IS THAT  IT IS USELESS TO SEND OVER SUCH RECRUITS UNTIL Q.50214 HAS  SELECTED AND SEMI OVER TO UNITED KINGDOM OFFICER HE INTENDS TO    ATTACH TO D R REASONS FOR THIS LINE ARE    1 IT HAY WELL BE THAT SOME RECRUITS WOULD NOT REPEAT NOT  BE. WILLING YTO WORK DIRECTLY UNDER BRITISH ORDERS.  'Qfiou ojOlolcUaJ    2. PRESENCdOF O.S.S. C2 QRPS MUT S.O.E. COUNTRY SECTION  WOULD ALLOW O.S.S. TO DENY THAT RECRUITS HAVE BEEN QUOTE  HANDED OVE'R TO BRITISH UNQUOTE.  D TELEGRAPH WHETHER ATTITUDE DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH C IS  IN ACCORDANCE WITH YOUR VIEWS AMD GIVE YOUR COMMENTS    WILL PRESS G 50214 FOR VIEWS TO YOUR TELEQRAM 644    TELEGRAM ENDS    TP 0520 29 10 42 HFB, L 0 C A L NO 489  CIPHER TELEGRAM DESPATCHED TO NEK YORK 27 10 42    .  ' '.   TO m FROM AD/U    i EFEREHCE YOUR 924 4 -.   A -UNABLE TO 'COHf RE THAT YQU 'AND 4 50f 214 UNDERSTANDING OF    ASREEHENT IS AS STATED 'IN PARAGONS OF tJUR TELEGRAM .72812 '  0 IR UNDERSTAND INS -9 T'IS AS STATED AN OF O.UR  TF-XELF4 'if-9A CF OCTOBER 20TH ' .    B ALL HOSWE lAMS SARRYINS' OOT -JOSMI NORtolAK -HIGH  CfiMHAND FORK AMD RECRUITED FOR-TRAS.NI'MO ARE APPROVED B  LATTER AMD ARE POSTED BY THEM TO. SPECIAL INpEPENOENT- N§RWE 51AH ..     COMPANY . . ' V. .  m  C-o ' AffY RFdRUITS PyT -FORWARD-BY 0 50 000 MUST THEREFORE .BE .  SIMILARLY APPROVED'AMD' TILL BE SUBJECT TV BORNEO I AN l-BCIf OO SARD B     ORDERS' OH ARRIVAL IS' . THIS COUNTRY. AND SUBSEQUENTLY IN ffiE ' -  FIFLO ' .' ... - L  Dc -FOR YOUR PERSONAL- NFORHAT OIL i'M&LV DUAL A NENTIONKD IR . '  PARA B OF YOUR TEtEORAH 92424 . IS PERSONA NON' -GRATA KST.Li .  MORBEC1 AN AUTHORl-T ES   S. ONLY EXCEPTION TO ABOVE RULE' KOULCA'cT PARTY. SUCH A T '  MENTIONED' IN PARA A OF OUS-2 592 '  AS OCD/0 EXPLAINED TO -214. Wmi SERE ALL OUR l-fQRK IS III  CLOSEST COLLABORATION KITH .FOREl ON COVETYHEKTS CONCERmSOs THAT  BUSY-A-TwTO .BE OOP GUIDING PRINCIPLE WL ABE ALWAYS' Wul.I HO TTO  ETTA OH TO OUR COUNTRY SECTION ANY ' GECK RA BI CAL-DESK -- BEPRETENTATIVES FROH' O.-STS A '   t TP -AT oeo5 280 10 42    ', bV    Ref Telegram 92k2k to A D/U from G.M.   I trust that this matter will be cleared up  and that there will be no further misunderstanding.    Any recruits from U.S.A. sent over for general  purposes will undoubtedly be more trouble than  they are worth.    So far as paragraph B. is concerned I have  already made mention of Lt. Stromholt in my  SN/1164 of 16.8.1j.2. This Officer is persona non  grata with the Norwegian High Command and is not  the type of person on whom the U.S. should depend  for advice and guidance.    You intimated to me that by agreement O.S.S  were not going to place any agents in Norway. I  trust that this agreement will be maintained. It  would spoil our present good relations with the  Norwegian authorities if we sought to introduce  any other personnel acting as agents for O.S.S., B8     -A f-   fcAsG i    CL L.r &   L.0CALNO237 ' ' ' ' tI  CIPHER TELEGRAM RECEIVED FROM NEW YORK DE8 1724 24 10 42  u    nou    Q2424 RECD 2020 24 10u42 c    TO A.D/U FROM G.M /A-tT L  YOUR TELEGRAM 592/3 OCTOBER SOTH    A Q. 50 214fS UNDERSTANDINC OF ARRANGEMENT IS AS STATED IN  PARAGRAPH ONE GF MY TELEGRAJ' 728 OCTOBER 12TH AND WHEN S WAS  IN LONDON D/C Do-3c CONFSRMEE THAT THIS UNDERSTANDING WAS CORRECT  BLEASE LET ME KNOW IF Q.50 214 AND HAVE GOT THIS WRONG    B. FOR YOUR PERSONAL INFORMATION AND QUITE APART FROM ISSUE  REFERRED TO IN PARAGRAPH A ABOVE Q 50. 214 WILL SHORTLY ASK US  IF WE HAVE ANY OBJECTION TO SEND TO NORWAY CERTAIN NORWEGIAN  RECRUITS INCLUDING A WHO WOLL0 BE UNDER OUR EFFECTIVE CONTROL  THOUGH THEY MIGHT WORK DIRECTLY UNDER AN AMERICAN OFFICER FROM  0 SesV ATTACHED TO OUR COUNTFY SECTION HEAD AS AGREED WITH G 50 214  THIS STAGE WILL PROBABLY NOT REPEAT NOT BE REACHED FOR SOME TINE 0MY IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING TELEGRAM TELEGRAM ENDS  TP AT 0109 2bo10.42 JC    t CIPHER TELEGRAM RECEIVED FRO NEW YORK DESP 1728 24.10.42    92524 RECD 2020 24 10.42    MY IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING TELEGRAM    A. IS LIEUTENANT STROHHOLT OF NORWEGIAN ARMY BROUGHT OUT OF NORWAY  BY BRITISH FORCES DURING LQFCTEN RAID. TELEGRAM ENDS  TP' AT 0110 26 1C 42 JC    %, LOCAL 48  CYPHER TELEGRAM DESPc TO NEW YORK 20 10 42 LL  Prh  FROM AD/U  YOUR 728   A UNDERSTAND NS WITH 0 50 214 WAS THAT IF G.50 000 INTENDED  TO UNDERTAKE THtf X PROJECT HE WOULD PROVIDE BODIES ND WE WOUL  ASSIST WITH TRAfNING AND INTELLIGENCE ANY MEN SENT OVER HERE  WOULD BE FOR THIS PURPOSE    Bo IT IS NOT PROPOSED THAT Qe508000 SHOULD SEND NORWEGIANS  FOR GENERAL So0o WORK WITH US AS WE HAVE SUFFICIENT RECRUITS    HERE ALREADY    C MY IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING    MY IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING    X0 IS KNABEN    TP 2236 20 10 42 MFB    ORIGIN U, CIPHER TELEQRAM RECEIVED FROM NEW YORK  j 812  C ESP 1645  r ECD 1625  13 10 42.  17 10o42  c  O'v  -I  aD/U FROM GM  1 UNDERSTAND FR8MG 5082/l4.CaD WOULD ELCOME FOR WOR  WITH S 0. LONDON SEVERAL. GROUPS OF NORWEGIAN AMERICAN  O.SaS. BODIES  2 PLEASE CONFIRM AND ASCERTAIN FOLLOW EG   A  CST  CCD  HOW MANY GROUPS REQUIRED  HOW MANY MEN OR OFFICERS THERE SIOULD BE IN EACH GROUP  ANY OTHER DETAILS CLD CAN LET US HAVE  AWAITING YOUR EARLY REPLY  2024 17.10.42 ' UC, ]