Nations (Nationalism)

The term nation is commonly used within political discourse and may be defined as a mass community who share an identity that combines elements of nationhood (such as a shared history and language).
For instance, the United Kingdom consists of four separate nations. England, Scotland and Wales are distinct nations within a unitary political system centred upon the sovereignty of the Westminster parliament. Northern Ireland is a far less cohesive nation with a centuries-old sectarian division between an Ulster-Scottish culture and an Irish culture. The troubled province may therefore be described as having two conflicting national identities. Protestants identify themselves as British and associate with the UK, whereas Catholics see themselves as part of a cohesive group within the island of Ireland. On a separate note, nationality may also contain a legal recognition via the process of citizenship, an initiative launched throughout the UK under New Labour.
In essence, a nation is a subjective entity in which people are bound together by a common language, religion, historical narrative and cultural traditions. It is grounded in a palpable yet intangible sense of national identity. To belong to a nation is a sentiment we feel more than we can ever properly articulate.
The historian Benedict Anderson (1983) provides a particularly useful insight here with his concept of imagined communities. For him, a nation is a social construct imagined by people who perceive themselves as part of that group as opposed to an objective reality. An imagined community is distinct to an actual community because it is not based upon everyday interaction amongst its members. It is inherently subjective and bound up with emotive appeals such as a sense of kinship with others.
A nation is often confused and conflated with the notion of a nation-state and it is important for students to distinguish between them.
A nation is an intangible entity based upon a shared identity, whereas a nation-state is a territorial construct in which a nation’s boundaries are contained within a state.
The nation-state is also a legal concept dating back to the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648. Westphalian sovereignty is the principle upon which each nation-state is sovereign over its defined territory. In Weberian language, the state has a monopoly on the legitimate use of coercion or force within that given political entity. The Westphalian system is also based upon the principles of non-interference and equality of nations under international law. Without them, the full force of xenophobia, chauvinism and hatred could be unleashed and the world may be plunged into the darkness of World War Three.
Before we leave this topic, a brief mention should go towards pan-nationalism. Pan-nationalism is a form of nationalism in which we seek association with a national territory that does not correspond to existing territorial boundaries. Pan-nationalism is based upon the assumption that a nation is a cluster of closely related ethnic or cultural groups who share a belief that their nation forms a fundamental social unit. The nation is therefore greater than the nation-state itself.
Pan-nationalism has a lengthy pedigree within the political world. During the inter-war years, the Nazis attempted to create living space for the Germanic people. As with Daesh, this was laced with propaganda that emphasised racial/religious superiority. Indeed, those who warn against the rise of Islamo-fascism note that the desire for lebensraum finds echoes in the desire amongst Daesh to create a caliphate. That said, pan-nationalism is not necessarily bound up with notions of national superiority. For instance, pan-Africanism attempts to encourage bonds of solidarity amongst those of African descent. It is centred upon a belief that unity amongst African descendants is a worthy goal in social, economic and political terms. There is a common destiny amongst the African peoples of the world and a sense of belonging amongst the African diaspora.



1.	Write your own definition of the term, ‘nation.’
2.	Explain one example of one region having two conflicting national identities.
3.	What is meant by an ‘imagined community’?
4.	Explain the difference between a nation and a nation state.
5.	Explain one example of pan-nationalism

Challenge 1: Summarize the concept of a ‘nation’ in one annotated sketch.
Challenge 2: Do you think the concept of a ‘nation’ based on the Westphalian system helps to promote peace and unity or division and conflict?










Self-determinism (Nationalism)

National self-determination is grounded upon the assumption that nations alone should be able to decide for themselves how they are to be governed.
No external force should take away a nation’s right to self-determination. This even applies to a failed state in which the rule of law does not exist in any meaningful sense.
In the recent case of Afghanistan, citizens participated in a democratic multi-party election once the US-led coalition forces had completed their mission. Closer to home, the right to self-determination is also applicable to Britain’s membership of the European Union.
Whilst it is entirely possible for a nation to join the economic and political union on a voluntary basis, it retains the right to leave that organisation in accordance with the rules laid down in the governing Treaties. National self-determination was therefore exercised by the United Kingdom when parliament decided to join the European Community back in 1973 and when the people decided in a referendum to leave the EU.
The right to self-determination is enshrined as a principle within international law. This is more widely known as the jus cogens rule which stipulates that nations; based on respect for the principle of equal rights, have the right to freely choose their sovereignty and status without outside interference.
The sovereign right to national self-determination may be further categorised on a de facto or de jure basis. The exercise of authority by the agents of the state on a de facto basis means it exists in practice.
De jure authority however reflects the legal status. This can at times prove to be a crucial distinction. For instance, a puppet regime holds de jure authority whereas de facto authority resides with the imperial power. During the cold war, the satellite states within Eastern Europe were effectively puppet regimes within the Soviet Empire. Attempts to exert their own national self-determination met with Soviet coercion (as in Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968). In the contemporary era, the alter-globalisation movement claims that the de facto rulers of the world economy are those institutions that implement the Washington consensus. Whilst nations can be said to be sovereign in a de jure sense, the de facto rulers are the IMF, the World Bank and the US Treasury. This is particularly evident when a nation takes out a conditional loan during times of economic difficulties.



Self-determination in more depth
National self-determination derives from the eight principles of the Atlantic Charter. As with a great many political documents, it left out the actual details of what the outcome should be, or what constitutes a nation. This provides ample ‘wiggle room’ for politicians to decide which groups constitute an actual nation.
As one would anticipate, there is little actual consensus to determine precisely which nations could legitimately claim the right to self-determination. In a purely de jure sense, the determining factor is recognition from other independent countries.
For instance, there is no external recognition as to the rights of Kurdish people whereas only Turkey officially recognises the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. Frankly, there is no shared consensus over which nations may employ the principle of self-determination. Since gaining independence in 2008, Kosovo has adopted an innovative approach to this problem by persuading Facebook to allow users to register their location as Kosovo (rather than Serbia). Interestingly, the existence of Kosovo as an independent nation is now more widely recognised online than offline.
History teaches us that the right to self-determination has the capacity to create either diplomacy or coercion in almost equal measure. This observation applies to mainstream movements that operate within the political process alongside those who advocate political violence against the status quo. The implementation of national self-determination may occur on a peaceful basis – such as when an oppressed nation seeks to exercise this right after a period of imperialism or domination from a more powerful country. Equally, the right to national self-determination also has the capacity to instigate political violence which may drag other nations into the conflict.




1.	How is the concept of self-determination applicable to Britain’s exit from the European Union?
2.	Give an example of how an institution holds sovereignty over a nation-state on a de facto basis.
3.	Explain the de jure method of defining what constitutes a nation.

Challenge 1: Is Kosovo a nation state?
Challenge 2: Explain, with examples, how the desire for national self-determination can lead to political divisions or conflict.


Nation States (Nationalism)

A nation-state is a theoretical construct based on the belief that the nation should be able to define its own borders and thereby exercise control over them.
The term nation-state holds wide currency within political discourse and the idea of a nation-state continues to shape independence movements. From the Tamils to the South Sudanese, independence movements seek to separate their nation and form their own nation-state. There are varying degrees of separation such as devolution within a unitary system, full fiscal autonomy and all-out independence.
Regardless of the format; the ability of a nation to decide how it shall be governed is a fundamental element of mainstream nationalist beliefs.
In the contemporary era, nation-states find it increasingly difficult to protect their borders from outside forces of terrorism and uncontrolled immigration. Nations also find themselves relatively powerless against the decisions and activities of a global financial system (a point brought graphically home during the credit crunch). As such, many informed commentators contend that the Westphalian era of the nation-state is in decline due to the wide-ranging impact of globalisation.
That said, citizens of a nation-state often hold a deep emotional attachment to their national identity. National identity offers comfort in a world of rapid social change, and globalisation may have led to a revival in the ideology of nationalism. There are several populist parties on the right of the political spectrum that seek electoral support based on their opposition attitude towards globalisation and the liberal elite.
It is also worth noting the distinction between a nation and the state. Crucially, the state is an objective reality whereas a nation may not be.
The United Kingdom exists as a state whereas the British identity is difficult to adequately characterise in any meaningful sense. It is also the case that over two-hundred nations have formed a state, and that many states are composed of a dominant nation. Political tension may arise when there are numerous nations living alongside each other in any given territory, particularly when there is a sizeable minority to accommodate. Equally, conflict may arise when there is a considerable level of divergence between the dominant nation and other national groups in terms of ethnic and cultural traditions.
In addition, it should also be noted that the nation-state is the instrument by which a nation may serve its collective interest. To establish an effective and smooth-running society, the nation-state may seek to impose a form of coercion against reactionary forces. As such, one of the positive outcomes of nationalism is the formation of an inclusive national identity against regressive forces fuelled by ethnic and tribal hatred. The nation-state may therefore be a counter against regressive attitudes within that nation.
An interesting case study to consider here is that of European integration. All member states have chosen to join a project committed to “an ever-closer union.” Supporters claim that moves towards a federal Europe strengthens the nation-state. This is based upon the view that members can pool sovereignty and thereby enhance their ability to promote their own national interests. In contrast, Eurosceptics claim that national sovereignty is a zero-sum game. As European laws and directives supersede that of national law, membership of the EU necessarily entails a direct loss of national sovereignty. Member states are therefore unable to shape its future, a theme prevalent amongst the Brexit campaign and its populist slogan ‘Take back control.’


1.	Define what is meant by a nation-state.
2.	What are the different degrees of creating a nation-state?
3.	Explain an example of how a nation-state struggles to protect its borders from an external force.
4.	Which political parties or leader appeal to people’s national identities in opposition to globalisation and the established liberal elite? Explain examples.
5.	How might ‘nations’ within a nation-state come into conflict?

Challenge 1: To what extent has globalisation undermined the concept of a nation-state?
Challenge 2: Is the EU a nation or a nation-state? Explain the different interpretations of ‘ever closer union’.













Racialism (Nationalism)
Racialism is the claim that we are divided by race. As such, it is impossible for an individual from a different national group to voluntarily join another.
Racial differences supersede any legalistic notions of citizenship or territorial disputes over national sovereignty. Unlike cultural nationalism, racialism is a form of ethnic nationalism in which the nation is defined by racial and ethnic characteristics. It is therefore exclusive as opposed to the inclusive character of civic nationalism.
Racialism is often mistaken for racism, but there is a subtle distinction to become familiar with.
Racism is a prejudicial mindset or hostility against those of a different racial origin, whereas racialism is a belief that the world is divided into distinct races. The crucial aspect of racialism is that racial characteristics are genetic and therefore cannot be altered. The traditional symbols of race (such as skin colour and bloodlines) are therefore fixed and immutable. Unique within the family of ideologies, there is zealous opposition towards inter-racial marriage as a mongrel race would weaken the racial stock.
During the nineteenth century, the French aristocrat Arthur Gobineau promulgated the argument that a “hierarchy of races” exist. He believed that the Aryans were the most developed and the most creative. The concept of Aryan superiority was further developed by Houston Chamberlain who claimed that the highest race was the Teutons whilst the Jews were spiritually and morally degenerate.
Influenced by such theorists, the Nazi regime took the concept of racialism towards its absolute extreme with their use of concentration camps (which were first used by British imperialists during the Boer War). This may serve as a warning from history that racialism can provide the intellectual basis for fascism. Racialism can also carry certain religious undertones; with Islamo-fascist groups such as al-Qaeda and Islamic State asserting the supremacy of the Muslim faith over non-believers (or infidels).
It is undoubtedly the case that parties along the far-right of the political spectrum are racialist in their outlook, but it is debatable to what extent they could all be labelled as racists. Given the need to gain elected office, many of those parties have sought to distance themselves from the charge of racism. The BNP has removed its whites-only membership clause, Le Front National expelled its founding figure Jean-Marie Le Pen due to Holocaust denial whereas the Alleanza Nazionale in Italy has denounced anti-Semitism. Such parties present themselves as ethnic nationals who seek to celebrate that which makes their respective nations great.

1.	Explain the difference between racialism and racism.
2.	Is this a fair distinction to make?
3.	What political parties today are racialist in their ideology? Explain with examples.
Internationalism
Internationalism is the very antithesis of nationalism. Perhaps because of this, an awareness of internationalism shines a light upon nationalism and helps us to better understand the continued appeal of nationalism within the global political realm.
Internationalism is based upon the view that world peace may be advanced when nations put aside their rivalries. Nations should work together to find common ground and build a safer and more stable world.
This is in part a recognition that nations acting alone cannot solve the multiple problems they face. Issues that face the nation-state are increasingly trans-national (such as environmental pollution and the drugs trade) and thereby necessitate a multilateral (or bilateral) response.
Moreover, the only means by which one can resolve complex and multi-faceted issues is to tackle the cause of the problem from an international perspective. For instance, the issue of illegal asylum seekers may require a co-ordinated multilateral approach from an alliance of countries. It may even justify the use of military action in areas of the world associated with terrorist groups (such as the Af-Pak border).
Several well-established organisations within the field of international relations seek to provide a forum in which nations may co-operate. Some of those organisations can play a major role within global relations, and in doing so; their actions can greatly undermine national sovereignty.
International organisations such as the United Nations (UN), NATO and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) bring nations together to advance shared goals and common interests. International organisations may even consist of supranational institutions such as the European Commission and the European Court of Justice. In the EU, supranational institutions exist above the nation-state and have the authority to impose decisions binding upon all the member states.
Internationalism also seeks to generate a belief in cosmopolitanism in which the world may be said to consist of a single community. Cosmopolitan notions emphasise the need to think beyond national borders, reach out to others and ultimately go beyond the confines of nationalism itself. We should therefore accept a sense of duty towards fellow humans regardless of their nationality. However, one of the major weaknesses of cosmopolitanism is the negligible impact of international law. The national sovereignty of powerful countries (notably the United States) has greater political power than measures taken by international bodies.

1.	How might internationalism be viewed as the opposite to nationalism?
2.	Explain one example of an issue facing nation-states which is multinational.
3.	Explain how some may view an international organisation as undermining the sovereignty of a nation-state
Challenge: What changes need to take place for cosmopolitanism to flourish?
